PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Environmental Sector
M.P. 201.05D

11/14-R

12/19-SR

The purpose of this procedure is to establish guidelines for handling large-scale events during and after fire
ground mitigation. These incidents could include multiple alarm fires, fires involving hazardous materials, major
spills, leaks, and other significant events that may result in environmental contamination or have a major impact
on the operation of City services. Many times the process of handling large-scale fires and associated
environmental impacts, especially those involving hazardous materials, is much more involved and time
consuming than the actual extinguishment of the fire.
Environmental Sector is responsible for the following:
1. EMERGENCY CONTACTS
The following is a list of contacts that shall be notified and respond to these types of incidents:
a. Phoenix Fire Department Special Operations Section designee. This person will coordinate the activities
of the following agencies and assure communications regarding the event to the Incident Commander &
Executive Staff of the Department.
b. State of Arizona Department of Environmental Quality designee. This person will coordinate the
activities to determine air, water or soil contamination and to assure that all environmental issues are
identified. This person will also work collectively with Department of Health Services to mitigate
conditions caused by environmental issues that are identified. This person will also work collectively
with the Department of Health Services to mitigate conditions caused by environmental issues that may
adversely affect the public health. This person will also work collectively with the Division of
Management and State Emergency Response Commission & Federal Agencies in the coordinating of
resources.
c. City of Phoenix Safety designee. This person will be responsible for safety briefing of City employees
other than Fire Department personnel.
d. City of Phoenix Emergency Management Coordinator. This person will be responsible for the operation
of the City’s Emergency Operations Center (if applicable) and the functions of this Center.
e. City of Phoenix Office of Environmental Programs designee. This person will be responsible for tracking
the environmental problems associated with the incident as identified by ADEQ and ADHS.
f. Maricopa County Local Emergency Planning Committee designee. This person will assist in coordination
with county agencies for the actions needed to mitigate the event.
g. State of Arizona Emergency Response Commission designee. This person will assist in coordinating with
State and Federal agencies the actions needed to mitigate the event.
h. State of Arizona Department of Health Services designee. This person will be responsible for matters
that affect public health as a result of environmental contamination from an incident.
i. Maricopa County Health Department, Public Health Director or designee or Director of
Epidemiology/Data Services or designee. This person will be responsible for matters that effect public
health as a result of environment contamination from an incident.

Page 1 of 3

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Environmental Sector
M.P. 201.05D

11/14-R

12/19-SR

2. RESPONSE NEEDS
The severity of the incident will dictate if all these members will be required on site. Special Operations Staff
will be assigned by Command to notify the appropriate parties. As appropriate parties are assembled, areas of
responsibilities will be further defined as the incident dictates.
3. ACTION PLAN
An action plan will be developed and agreed upon as to what each member will be responsible for and who will
be the central point of contact. As information is developed, the agency designated as the central point of
contact will inform all the members, and a joint release of information will be made to the public. This
information will be real time and updated as often as needed until the event is terminated and all related issues
of public concern have been handled.
4. INCIDENT CONCLUSION
At the conclusion of the incident, the members will reassemble and a joint report will be generated regarding all
activity involving the incident. In this way, all information will be fully shared amongst all agencies involved in
the information gathering and decision making process.

Flow Chart During HM Incidents
(Environmental Issues)
Phoenix Fire Department
Car 957
Incident
Command Liaison

CITY SAFETY

Emergency Operations Center

ADEQ

ADEM/SERC

County
EM/LEPC

Sampling
Needs
County
Health Dept.

ADHS

= REQUIRED/Formal Contact
= OPTIONAL/Informal Contact

Page 2 of 3

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Environmental Sector
M.P. 201.05D

11/14-R

Page 3 of 3

12/19-SR

