PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

CUSTOMER SERVICE MANAGEMENT
M.P. 201.00

10/15-R

06/20-SR

The Central Arizona Life Safety System Response Council (CALSSRC), Automatic Aid System is a consortium of
governments (Cities, Towns, and Fire Districts) joined by an intergovernmental agreement upon which the
participants agree to operationally act as one-entity for the purpose of improved fire/rescue/emergency medical
services. Together we respond to hundreds-of-thousands of calls for service each year, some calls may seem routine
to us, but for the person who called, it is not routine. As professionals we will provide excellent customer service on
each and every call, to each and every customer.
CALSSRC defines the customer as, any person who receives our services and anyone with who our members have
dealings. Examples of this definition include:
• The actual service recipient
• Anyone who knows or is closely related to the service recipient (e.g., family, friends, neighbors, etc.)
• The people we encounter, directly and indirectly during our workday (e.g., members of organizations we
routinely do business with, people who visit our workplace, people who see us during our workday, and
people who see us on the road)
• The members of our organization including support staff (our customer services begin with how we treat
each other)
These customers are an integral part of our workday. We will treat them in a positive way and include them in our
plan to execute excellent customer service. Every interaction with our customers is an opportunity to solve their
problem and leave a positive, lasting impression.
PROCEDURE
Our mission and number one priority is to deliver the best customer service possible. Our members are responsible
for the following as it relates to customer service:
1. Treat all customers with respect, kindness, patience and consideration. We will respond quickly, skillfully,
and positively to every customer.
2. Deal with the customer’s situation as an urgent event, from the time we know about it until it is over.
3. Identify and act on opportunities for added value. Added value occurs when we go beyond our standard
quick, effective, professional, customer service to create a feeling that the customer was the most important
person we served all day. Added value only requires a little extra effort and leaves our customer with the
opinion that we care.
4. Provide exceptional customer service, whenever possible. CALSSRC delegates official authority and trusts its
members with the power to provide customer service to the level of their abilities and imagination. A
members evaluation as to whether or not they are empowered to provide exceptional customer service is
determined by:
a. Is it the right thing for the customer?
b. Is it the right thing for the department?
c. Is it legal, ethical, and nice?
Page 1 of 2

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

CUSTOMER SERVICE MANAGEMENT
M.P. 201.00

d.
e.
f.
g.

10/15-R

06/20-SR

Is it safe?
Is it on your organizational level?
Is it something you are willing to be accountable for?
Is it consistent with our department’s values and policies?

If the answer to these questions is yes, then don’t ask permission. You are empowered to provide exceptional
customer service.
5. Create and sustain a positive public image
a. Follow Phoenix Regional Standard Operating Procedures.
b. Be professional at all times.
c. Give the customer your undivided attention.
d. Take a moment (when appropriate) to educate the customer(s) about what we do and why we are
doing it.
In addition to the above, Company Officers and Command Officers are responsible for the following:
1. Provide a work environment in which exceptional customer service and added value are the result of a
refined system where members are empowered to operate between the lines to provide caring service with
both quality and value.
2. Basic organizational behavior must be customer oriented.
3. Invest in human resources by keeping customer service a part of an ongoing development process.
4. Take responsibility for themselves and their subordinates and expand authority in others.
5. Sustain and enhance regional commitment and consistency in the execution of professional services and
customer satisfaction.
OPERATIONAL INFORMATION
The organizational benefits of providing exceptional customer service, with added value, are numerous. Benefits
include:
• It saves lives and property
• Builds positive relationships and trust within our membership
• Builds positive relationships and trust in our community
• Secures and maintains adequate resources and benefits
• Positive job satisfaction
• Places us in the best position to compete
• It's fun to be nice and do nice things
• It eliminates bad press, liability, and extra paperwork
• It’s the right thing to do

Page 2 of 2

