PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Emergency Power Outage Plan
M.P. 201.02B

11/14-R

12/19-SR

The purpose of this plan is to describe Deployment Services and Fire Operations actions that will be followed
during extended power outages with extreme (heat or cold) weather conditions. The aim of this plan is to
check and secure the welfare of those customers in the outage area that may be at high risk due to age,
health/impairments, or immobility’s. The well-being of citizens in this group could be compromised or
challenged, having to go without electrical service, heating, and cooling for extended periods of time.
In a reported electrical power outage area, a power company "trouble shooter" or repair crew must arrive at
the location of the power outage to survey the damage before an estimated time of repair can be made. Once
the estimated time of repair is determined, this information is relayed to the power company operation center.
The supervisor in each center should be the contact point for Deployment Services. Deployment Services has
direct ring-down lines to both APS and SRP operation centers.
PROCEDURE
The Emergency Power Outage Plan can be implemented when the heat stress factor (temperature and
humidity) exceeds 105 or extremely cold temperatures below 34 degrees. This activation may be initiated at the
discretion of:
1. North Shift Commander or South Shift Commander
2. Deployment Battalion Chief or Deployment Supervisor
3. Any Executive Staff Chief Officer or Command Officer
The objective of the Emergency Power Outage Plan is to provide basic guidelines for operational response to
assist citizens during extended power outages. The specific focus of this procedure is to address the immediate
and perhaps long-term needs of high-risk groups such as the elderly, shut-in, and/or infirm during extreme
weather conditions.
Upon notification of a significant power outage, the Deployment Battalion Chief Officer or Deployment
Supervisor will work in conjunction with the North Shift Commander and South Shift Commander to implement
the Emergency Power Outage procedure.
The Shift Commanders should notify on-duty Battalion Chiefs of the implementation of the Emergency Power
Outage Plan (All-call).
The Battalion Chief of the affected area should be dispatched to meet with the power company “customer
service representative” to establish a partnership to determine and coordinate resource and specific need
requirements of that area; (i.e., evacuations/location, Red Cross, door-to-door check welfare, neighborhood
activation, transportation, hospitals, loss control, ice, heating, rehab, PIO, and Occupant Services and CR vans) if
necessary a Command Team may be activated.

Page 1 of 3

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Emergency Power Outage Plan
M.P. 201.02B

11/14-R

12/19-SR

The Shift Commanders and Deployment Battalion Chief Officer will assist in coordinating communications
between fire, power company operations, and other agencies.
Weather often times is a major factor in power outages, so it is likely that the Emergency Power Outage Plan
will have to be implemented in concert with components of the Emergency Operations Plan and procedures for
severe storm.
If evacuation is required, the Evacuation Plans M.P. identifies the method and resources required to execute a
small to large-scale evacuation.
When a large-scale power outage creates a high demand for fire department resources and services, and those
circumstances require a commitment beyond normal capabilities, the Emergency Operations Plan should be
considered.
A system-wide outage is not plausible; a large outage would be managed by utilizing Command Procedures.
OPERATIONAL INFORMATION
The power companies generally experience three types of power outages:
LOCAL OUTAGES
FEEDER OUTAGES
ROLLING BLACKOUTS

Such as wires or poles down, pole fires or transformer problems which usually
will affect a local area.
Such as damage or problems at one of their substations or major distribution
lines. Feeder outages will normally cause a larger area to be without power.
As a last resort power companies will discontinue electricity to circuits to
reduce power consumption and allow the company time to reroute power to
compensate for the outage. This should only last 20 – 30 minutes.

These terms are relative to the perspective of each power company, for instance, LOCAL--when a transformer
goes out in an area served by SRP, it will usually cut service to approximately 10 residences. Whereas an area
served by APS, one transformer outage could affect approximately 35 residences or in some locations could
affect as many as 800 homes. FEEDER--a major line or circuit outage in a SRP area would cut services to
approximately 200 customers (residences/commercial). Whereas the same outage in an APS area could affect
2,000 (two thousand) of their customers. A rolling blackout can occur when demand for electricity exceeds
supply and this usually affects a large geographic area. A rolling blackout can be compared to a large
thunderstorm moving across the Valley, resulting in power outages behind the front.

Page 2 of 3

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Emergency Power Outage Plan
M.P. 201.02B

11/14-R

12/19-SR

Time without power will be a major determining factor in any plans developed or actions taken.
The power company can provide a good description as to the size, type of occupancies, location, and number of
customers in the areas without power. Most rolling blackouts will last 20 to 30 minutes and may not require
evacuations.
Both power companies will assign "customer service reps" who will respond to the outage areas to assist with
questions and in some cases providing hot or cold drinks and ice to the customer.
Consideration should be given to the following:
1. Duration of the outage (greater than three hours consider evacuation, less than three hours shelter inplace)
2. PIO and media notifications
3. Firefighter call back
4. City coverage
5. Shelters
6. Use of City buses
7. Red Cross
8. Liaison(s) (SRP, APS, etc.)
9. Emergency Operations Center
10. City Official Notifications

Page 3 of 3

