PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

IN-TRANSIT, ON-DECK, COMPANY RECYCLE
M.P. 201.01A

05/21-R

Page 1 of 4

The purpose of this procedure is to establish a standard deployment approach to communicating
company arrival to assigned work areas, to define On-Deck deployment and Company Recycling.
IN-TRANSIT
In Transit is the time it takes for a company to reach their assignment area after receiving an order.
It often varies due to:
• Distance between staging and the incident
• Size of the incident perimeter
• Amount of equipment the company needs to assemble
The Incident Commander (IC) or Sector Officer will lose direct accountability of these companies
while they’re In Transit. It is the responsibility of the Company Officer to monitor the tactical radio
channel while In Transit. Upon arrival to the assignment area the Company Officer must provide
a radio announcement to the IC (i.e., E-1 On Deck in North Sector) or report face-to-face with the
Sector Officer that the company is intact and in the assigned area.
ON-DECK
On-Deck is defined as a tactical function within a Sector for layering of resources in forward
positions. On-Deck is not an independent forward staging location. On-Deck companies should
be located just outside the immediate hazard zone, safely distanced from the entrance of a tactical
position/Sector. On-Deck crews will be supervised either by the Sector Officer or Company Officer
of the On-Deck crew and will remain On-Deck until assigned by the IC or Sector Officer. The most
likely assignments for On-Deck companies are:
• Rapid Intervention Crew
• Reinforce a position within an assigned sector
• Crew relief within an assigned sector
• Any other tactical position assigned by the IC
The IC should coordinate with the Sector Officers to provide effective resource levels in each
Sector to manage the tactical objectives, work/rest cycles, as well as reserve or layered resources
to respond to changes in conditions or a Mayday.
Once the IC has deployed units to the critical sectors around the incident scene, the IC must then
take a proactive aggressive approach to assigning additional resources to those sectors. This is
best achieved by assigning staged resources as On-Deck crews to those areas as soon as they
arrive in staged positions. Layering On-Deck crews around the fireground will also provide the IC
with the tactical reserves to manage the standard work cycle or sudden and unexpected events.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

IN-TRANSIT, ON-DECK, COMPANY RECYCLE
M.P. 201.01A

05/21-R

Page 2 of 4

Assigning On-Deck crews is done simply by contacting a staged company and directing them to
go On-Deck in a specific Sector. The order would sound like this: “Command to Engine 5, go OnDeck on the north side of the structure, Engine 1 is your accountability location, you are assigned
to North Sector.”
A crew assigned to an On-Deck position will need to park their apparatus in a manner that doesn’t
block access to the scene. Crews must be intact with full PPE, forecast the need for and collect all
the necessary tools/equipment (including the RIC Bag) and report directly to their assigned
location. Upon arrival, the On-Deck company must contact the IC or their Sector Officer and inform
them that they are in position and ready to go to work. On-Deck crews must remain intact, in a
ready state and monitor the tactical channel at all times. On-Deck crews must also size up the area
that they are assigned to, this size up should include:
• Locating the structures entrance/exit points in their assigned area
• Interior and exterior conditions
• Unit ID of crews operating inside the structure
• Approximate location of interior crews
• Identify which crews are operating each hose line
When an On-Deck crew is used as a relief crew, the Company Officer should do a face-to-face and
transfer information with the Company Officer exiting the structure. The information transferred
should include:
• Interior conditions
• Routing instructions to the work area
• Interior obstructions
• Additional tools/resources required
• Sector objectives
COMPANY RECYCLING
Recycling is defined as a timely and efficient means of air replacement and re-hydration of
companies while maintaining their sector assignment. Recycling of Companies does not
necessitate communication with the IC. The Sector Officer is responsible for the position and
function of assigned companies, including companies that are recycling. Companies operating
within a sector will require the refilling of air and fluid replacement in predictable time frames. If
conditions permit, a company work cycle could be up to 2 to 3 air cylinders. To maintain a steady
stream of resources in critical sectors, crews being relieved and exiting their sector should recycle
themselves in a timely manner. Companies being relieved and recycled will remain in their
assigned sector, follow established exposure reduction and decontamination guidelines, refill

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

IN-TRANSIT, ON-DECK, COMPANY RECYCLE
M.P. 201.01A

05/21-R

Page 3 of 4

their air supply, and re-hydrate then report back to their Sector Officer or the IC that they are ready
to go back to work.
Command/Sector Officers have the option of assigning/requesting a Utility Company to
geographic sectors. Utility companies assigned to geographic areas on the fireground will help
expedite the recycle of companies within the sector. Company Officers should forecast the length
of time they will be working in an assigned sector and should bring spare air cylinders if necessary.
This will enable a company to recycle close to their sector in a timely manner when a utility truck
is not available in their sector or area. The Sector Officer may need to request additional resources
to replace On-Deck crews or have recycled crews assume vacated On-Deck positions.
Sector and Company Officers are responsible to monitor the welfare of their personnel at all times
and determine if sector recycling or a formal rehab is appropriate. At large scale incidents
Command may establish Rehab Sector. Most of the time, crews that are assigned to rehab will be
placed back in service after rehabbing. Rehab Sector may be located quite a distance from the
work area and this distance creates the potential for:
• Command losing direct accountability of companies in transit to rehab
• Difficulty reassembling and reassigning crews in a timely manner from rehab
DIRECTION FOR ON-DECK COMPANIES
The Regional Operations Consistency Committee is charged with ensuring all Automatic Aid
Partners act as one-entity for the purposes of emergency service delivery. When assigning OnDeck Companies, the IC may provide specific direction to those companies as needed. For
example, the IC may:
• Direct the On-Deck Company to spot on a hydrant or lay a second supply line.
• Direct the On-Deck company to focus their efforts specifically on operating as a Rapid
Intervention Crew for the assigned Sector. For example, “Command to Engine 273, go OnDeck for Rescue on the south side of the structure, Engine 207 is your accountability
location, you are assigned to Interior Sector.”
In the instance of any critical need, like treatment of a civilian victim rescued from the fire, the OnDeck company should be directed to initiate treatment. If this occurs, the IC will assign another
fire company to go On-Deck for Rescue reporting to Interior Sector.
Note: Regional consistency is critical, especially in a Mayday situation. The best practice for
regional consistency in a Mayday situation is for the IC to organize the incident in a consistent

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

IN-TRANSIT, ON-DECK, COMPANY RECYCLE
M.P. 201.01A

05/21-R

Page 4 of 4

manner and for the Sector Officer to manage the resolution of the Mayday situation within their
sector.

