PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Evacuation Sector
M.P. 201.05E

11/14-R

12/19-SR

PURPOSE
The purpose of this procedure is to provide guidelines to conduct an evacuation of citizens in a geographic area
during an emergency incident. The potential for evacuation should be considered during all emergency
incidents. The key to an organized and manageable evacuation is to develop an Incident Command System
early and initiate a plan and to continually update the plan.
A plan for evacuation should address the following factors:
1. A Command structure
2. Determine the need for evacuation versus in-place sheltering
3. Early notification of the Police Department
4. Identification of an area to be evacuated, perimeters, etc.
5. Required resources
6. Evacuation time frame
7. Identification of shelter sites and preparation of these sites
8. Duration of the evacuation
9. Re-entry of those evacuated
10. Information about the hazard and evacuation presented to evacuees (multi-lingual)
11. Follow-up with evacuees upon re-entry
12. Security of the area evacuated
Other areas which will need to be considered also include:
1. Activation of the Emergency Operations Center (EOC)
2. Assignment of a Police Liaison Sector
3. Communications
4. Media support (PIO)
5. Establishing a Transportation Branch/Sector for evacuees
6. Communicating evacuation plan and shelter sites to the Command organizations of all agencies involved
AREA OF EVACUATION
The area of initial evacuation should be identified by the Incident Commander. The Planning Section will reevaluate the evacuation area and recommend any necessary adjustments. The evacuation boundaries should
follow streets and established roadways. A map should be utilized and distributed to all officers and agencies
involved. Maps need to be provided to the Evacuation Branch and the Police Department.
In some situations, in-place sheltering can be used to protect the public rather than initiating an evacuation. Inplace sheltering can be considered during the following circumstances:
1. The hazardous material has been identified as having a low or moderate level of health risk
2. The material has been released from its container and is now dissipating
3. Leaks can be controlled rapidly and before evacuation can be completed
Page 1 of 9

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Evacuation Sector
M.P. 201.05E

11/14-R

12/19-SR

4. Exposure to the product is expected to be short-term and of low health risk
5. The public can be adequately protected by staying indoors
Command may need to provide instructions to the affected public such as the need to stay indoors shutting
down their evaporative cooling systems and closing all doors and windows.
LEVELS OF EVACUATION
There are three levels of evacuation. Each requires a different resource commitment. They include:
1. SITE EVACUATION
Site evacuation involves a small number of citizens. This typically includes workers at the site and people from
adjacent occupancies or areas. The citizens are easily evacuated and collected upwind of the perimeter area.
Evacuation holding times are typically short, generally less than an hour or two, and citizens are permitted to
return to their businesses or homes.
2. INTERMEDIATE LEVEL EVACUATION
The Intermediate Level involves larger numbers of citizens and/or affects a larger area. This level affects off-site
homes and businesses and normally affects fewer than 100 people. People may remain out of the area for two
to four hours or more. Evacuation completion times will be somewhat longer than a site evacuation but
generally rapid. Collecting, documenting and controlling the evacuees becomes more difficult. Off-site
collection sites or shelter areas will need to be determined and managed. Some evacuees will leave the area on
their own or be sent home by employers. Site perimeters become larger and perimeter security requires more
resources. Close coordination with the Police Department and other agencies will be required.
3. LARGE-SCALE EVACUATION
A large or concentrated release of a hazardous substance may cause a large scale evacuation. Thousands of
citizens could be evacuated. Rapid initiation of the evacuation process may be required. Evacuees may be out
of their homes and businesses for many hours if not days. Evacuation completion time frames will be extended.
Evacuation shelters will need to be located, opened and managed. Documentation and tracking of evacuees
becomes more important as well as more difficult. Very close coordination with the police and other agencies
will be required. Site and evacuation perimeters become extended and require much more resources to
maintain. Security of the evacuated area is always a concern. The Emergency Operations Center (EOC) will be
activated to support the evacuation and site operations.
There are no precise parameters differentiating one level of evacuation from another. The Incident
Commander must implement a Command Organization that meets the needs of each particular incident.

Page 2 of 9

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Evacuation Sector
M.P. 201.05E

11/14-R

12/19-SR

DURATION OF EVACUATION
The evacuation should be sustained as long as the risk continues in the evacuated area. Caution should be
taken when deciding to allow residents to return to their homes to ensure that the situation is truly under
control. Re-evacuating is difficult to complete as many residents will not want to go a second time. It can also
be extremely hazardous. Evacuees must be updated with information as soon as possible and periodically
throughout the incident.
WHO SHOULD BE EVACUATED
All residents living/working in the area identified should be evacuated. In the event that a resident decides not
to evacuate, they should be specifically informed of the risk and, if they still refuse, left to stay. The Evacuation
Branch is to be notified and a note of the citizen's address made for further follow-up.
RED CROSS RESPONSIBILITIES
Once long-term sheltering is identified, the Red Cross will manage shelters. Early notification is required. The
Red Cross will need up to three hours to get adequate personnel, equipment and supplies to the shelter sites.
SHELTER SITES
When developing the evacuation plan, shelter sites must be identified early. Shelter site selection cannot wait
on the Red Cross. Site selection must be made by the Incident Commander at the time evacuation is ordered
and sites need Sector officers assigned.
Some Fire department resources will need to be committed to the shelters, particularly in the area of initial
opening and staffing by a shelter crew, and later for potential emergency medical support and information
management.
A Red Cross representative should be assigned to each shelter. An Occupant Services officer should also be
assigned to each shelter.
COMMAND STRUCTURE
The Planning Section is responsible for all planning associated with the evacuation. The evacuation plan is
communicated to the Incident Commander for approval or modification. The actual evacuation process would
normally be managed in the Operations Section as an Evacuation Branch or Sector. The Evacuation Branch
must be provided with sufficient resources to effectively complete the task. Sector assignments within the
Evacuation Branch will be assigned as necessary. The following Sections may be implemented:
1. Operations Section
2. Planning Section
3. Logistics Section
4. Administration Section
Page 3 of 9

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Evacuation Sector
M.P. 201.05E

11/14-R

12/19-SR

The Planning Section would be responsible for developing an evacuation plan in joint cooperation with the
Police Department. Other Sections play a supporting role in the Command Organization. The following
Branches may be implemented:
1. Evacuation Branch
2. Transportation Branch
3. Medical Branch
4. Haz Mat Branch
5. Fire Branch
6. Geographic Branches
The Evacuation Branch officer may be a police officer. Branches will be implemented as needed. Branch
officers receive the plan and objectives from Command. Branch officers direct sectors in completing the plan
and objectives. Separate radio channels will be required.
Sectors to be considered include:
1. Public Information Sector
2. Geographic Sectors (Multiple Sectors)
3. Police Liaison Sector
4. Staging Sector
5. Transportation Sector
6. Shelter Sectors
7. Other Agency Liaison Sectors
8. Other Sectors as necessary
COMMAND RESPONSIBILITIES
Command's responsibilities include the following items:
1. Rapidly size up the situation to determine the need to evacuate
2. Develop Evacuation Plan
3. Request a police supervisor to the Command Post
4. Determine evacuation perimeters
5. Determine the number and location of shelter sites and communicate the locations to the Command
organization (Use the CAD INFO SHELTERS or the Yellow Evacuation Manual for shelters and maps)
6. Order evacuation
7. Provide resources required
8. Establish police liaison; request a ranking police officer to the Command Post
9. Provide a ranking fire officer to the police liaison officer/Police Command Post
10. Order the alert of other appropriate agencies
11. Expand the Command organization to meet the incident/evacuation needs
12. Establish an evacuation plan and communicate the plan to Branches, Sectors and agency liaisons
Page 4 of 9

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Evacuation Sector
M.P. 201.05E

11/14-R

12/19-SR

13. Monitor, support and revise the evacuation process as necessary
14. Evacuate persons from the greatest danger first
15. Assign specific areas to evacuate in order to avoid duplication or missed areas [use Fire department
map book - either page numbers (e.g., NE0107) or hydrant zone numbers as grids]
16. Provide the transportation necessary for evacuees
17. Provide continuing command of the evacuation, de-commitment and return of evacuees
18. Determine the need to implement a unified command structure involving other agencies (this would
depend upon the nature of the incident)
COMMUNICATIONS
A separate radio frequency should be used for the Evacuation Branch. This should be assigned as early in the
incident as possible.
DISPATCH AND DEPLOYMENT RESPONSIBILITIES
1. Dispatch appropriate resources as requested
2. Notify the appropriate Fire and City officials
3. Notify the appropriate support agencies as requested or listed in Standard Operating Procedures
4. Initiate recall of additional Dispatch staff to meet the demands of the incident
5. Notify the City telephone switchboard operator and provide the operator a status report. Update the
operator as needed
6. Notify the hospitals in the area of evacuation (both those exposed and not exposed) and provide a
status report and updates as needed (intermediate and large-scale evacuations)
7. Update Fire Administration staff of the status of the incident if it is during normal business hours (they
will receive many calls from citizens requesting information)
PUBLIC INFORMATION OFFICER'S RESPONSIBILITIES
1. Establish PIO Sector
2. Notify the news media and provide status reports and updates as necessary
3. Provide the media with consistent and accurate evacuation instructions as provided by Command
4. Utilize the media and coordinate evacuation notices through news media
MEDIA SUPPORT
The incident PIO should be informed of the evacuation plan so that the media is aware of the areas to be
evacuated, shelter sites and any evacuation instructions to the public. The PIO should make every effort to
assemble the media at the scene to keep them away from hazards and out of the evacuation area. Residents
may receive information from the media during the evacuation, so it is critical that the media information be
accurate.
Also needed is a single phone number that should be released to the public for information.
Page 5 of 9

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Evacuation Sector
M.P. 201.05E

11/14-R

12/19-SR

POLICE LIAISON
A police representative will need to be assigned to the Planning Section and another to the Evacuation Branch
as a liaison. The police liaisons will communicate with the Police Incident Commander and keep other parties in
the Police Department informed of the plan, progress, etc.
POLICE RESPONSIBILITIES
The Police Department will be an integral part of the evacuation process, as a large portion of the evacuation is
usually accomplished by the Police Department. Police responsibilities include:
1. Provide a ranking officer to the Incident Command Post
2. Provide a ranking officer to the Evacuation Branch/Sector
3. Develop a Police Incident Command System to manage police operations
4. Provide a communication system for police resources
5. Provide police resources needed for evacuation
6. Provide traffic control and traffic routing
7. Provide perimeter security
8. Provide evacuation zone security
9. Identify transportation needs
EVACUATION BRANCH RESPONSIBILITIES
On large-scale evacuations, a Branch level position on a separate radio channel will be necessary. Sectors will
also need to be established and report to the Evacuation Branch officer.
Typically, a large commitment of police officers will be required to accomplish an evacuation. The Evacuation
Branch officer may be either a police or fire officer. The Evacuation Branch must obtain a ranking police official
at his/her location in order to closely coordinate evacuation efforts. An appropriate commitment of police
resources must be obtained. Evacuation responsibilities include:
1. Obtain resources needed to evacuate
2. Obtain ranking police officer as liaison
3. Provide a ranking fire officer to serve as or support the Branch officer
4. Establish Sectors as needed
5. Provide Sectors objectives and specific areas to evacuate (use Fire department map pages or hydrant
zones in Fire department map book for grids)
6. Provide Sectors with shelter location and instructions
7. Provide Sectors with evacuation instruction pads and written evacuation information for evacuees if
possible (consider needs for multiple languages)
8. Provide Sectors with private vehicle routing instructions (out of the area)
9. Obtain/provide ambulances, buses or other transportation to those requiring transportation out of the
area
10. Evacuate those at greatest risk first
Page 6 of 9

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Evacuation Sector
M.P. 201.05E

11/14-R

12/19-SR

11. Evacuate the greatest concentrated areas next (e.g., apartment complex)
12. Consider individual Sectors for large population occupancies (e.g., multi-story buildings, large apartment
complexes, schools, etc.)
13. As individual geographic or grid Sectors complete their evacuations, terminate the Sector identity and
reassign resources to other developing Sectors (for large-scale evacuation)
14. Closely document and maintain records of the evacuation process to avoid duplication or missed areas
15. Document those addressees and times for those refusing to leave
INFORMATION AND NOTIFICATION
The Police Department and fire companies should be used for resources/staffing to conduct a walk-through or
drive-through in the area to be evacuated. Fire companies should be assigned to hazardous areas with police
assigned to safe areas. The officers should provide residents with information about the situation and be told
that they are being evacuated, to where, and why. It is necessary to inform the residents of shelter areas being
established to minimize confusion and anxiety.
ON-SITE NOTIFICATION TO EVACUATE
Door-to-door notification is time-consuming. In many cases, adequate resources and time is not available to do
this type of face-to-face notification. Use of sirens, air horns and PA systems will speed the alert process.
When making door-to-door evacuations:
1. Be in uniform
2. Wear your helmet
Face-to-face notification should include the following instructions:
1. There is an emergency
2. You are in danger
3. Leave immediately
4. Go to shelter (location)
5. Take (
) route out of area
6. Do you need transportation?
7. Consider multi-lingual needs
Evacuees should be advised to take the following items:
1. Wallet/purse
2. House and car keys
3. Money
4. Eyeglasses
5. Medications
6. Proper/warm clothing
7. Family pet
In other situations, where immediate and rapid evacuation makes door-to-door notification impossible, use the
following notification method:
Page 7 of 9

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Evacuation Sector
M.P. 201.05E
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

11/14-R

12/19-SR

Use three (3) five-second blasts of the siren while on the "YELP" setting
Follow with the standard evacuation instruction over PA system (see instructions above)
Use maximum volume on PA system
Proceed slowly to maximize notification
Initiate notification at the beginning of each block and each 50 yards after that

***Once each assigned grid of objectives is complete, report completion to the Evacuation Branch/Sector
Officer***
An information phone line may need to be set up to provide an information source for citizens with concerns
about the incident. This information would be for family members affected by the evacuation or medical
information for Haz Mat incidents and general information about the evacuation.
REFUSAL TO LEAVE
Evacuations follow somewhat of a triage philosophy; we will evacuate the greatest number for the greatest
benefit. Individual refusals will be left to fend for themselves. There simply may not be enough time or
resources to initiate forced removal of persons from their homes. However, documentation of the refusal
should be done. Write the address down (or if radio traffic permits, radio the address to the Evacuation
Branch). A few methods of persuasion include:
1. Be in uniform
2. Wear your helmet
3. Wear SCBA and facepiece (air hose may not need to be connected) when advising the citizen to leave
4. Ask for next of kin and a phone number
5. Write the next of kin information down
6. Refusals should be noted and reported to the Branch Officer by radio
TRANSPORTATION BRANCH/SECTOR
A Transportation Sector should be established within the Evacuation Branch. Ambulances and other transport
vehicles should be staged in the event that a citizen may need transportation to a shelter or other location.
Non-ambulatory people must be located and information provided to the Transportation Sector so that they are
not overlooked in the evacuation. Transportation Branch/Sector responsibilities include:
1. Obtain buses (start with a minimum of two) and other vehicles that can be used for transportation
2. Stage all transportation resources
3. Put one firefighter (or police officer) on each vehicle equipped with a fire or police department radio
4. Coordinate the Evacuation Sector (or Evacuation Branch) pick-up points or addresses of those citizens
needing transportation

Page 8 of 9

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Evacuation Sector
M.P. 201.05E

11/14-R

12/19-SR

EMERGENCY OPERATIONS CENTER (EOC)
If a significant or major evacuation occurs, the City's Emergency Operations Center (EOC) will be activated. The
EOC will collect department heads and senior staff from the Fire, Police, City Manager's office, Public Works and
other City departments to the EOC. The EOC's objective is to use the City's resources to support the incident.
Command should be prepared for this support and potential policy direction in regards to the incident and
evacuation operations.
If the EOC is in operation, the Planning Section is responsible for briefing and maintaining communication with
the EOC. A radio communications link (another radio channel) with the EOC and a cellular telephone link may
be required. If the EOC has a CAD terminal, the EOC liaison will need access to an MCT. Responsibilities of the
Planning Section's EOC Liaison Officer are:
1. Obtain a radio communications link with the EOC (through Dispatch Headquarters on a separate
channel)
2. Obtain a cellular telephone or other communications link with the EOC (City of Phoenix EOC phone
numbers: 262-6100, 262-6664, 262-7293)
3. Obtain an immediate status report from Command and provide that report to the EOC Fire Officer
4. Provide an immediate report to the EOC on any changes in plans, strategy, problems encountered, etc
5. Provide progress reports every 30 minutes unless the EOC requires more frequent reports
6. Act as the communications link from EOC to Command
7. Provide Command with direction, policy information, etc., that is communicated from the EOC
Once established, the EOC will usually remain in operation for the duration of the evacuation. Command will
maintain an EOC liaison and a communication link with the EOC throughout the evacuation, including
decommitment and return of evacuees.
RETURN EVACUEES
The decision to return evacuees to their homes will be the sole responsibility of the fire department Incident
Commander. If the EOC is operating, the decision to return evacuees will be made by the EOC staff. No other
City agency will be authorized to order the return.
The Planning Section will jointly develop a return plan for evacuees.
Returning evacuees may require some transportation be provided. A Transportation Sector should be
reactivated to organize these needs.

Page 9 of 9

