PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

EMERGENCY DEPLOYMENT
M.P. 201.02A

03/2021-R

Page 1 of 3

PURPOSE
The purpose of this procedure is to provide guidelines for the operational response to situations
which create peak demand for emergency services within the Automatic Aid System.
Emergency Deployment is intended to significantly increase the number of available emergency
response resources.
PROCEDURE FOR EMERGENCY DEPLOYMENT ACTIVATION AND DEACTIVATION
1. Emergency Deployment will be activated at the direction of the on-duty Operations
Deputy Chief (i.e., Shift Commander, District Commander, etc.) in conjunction with
Alarm Room Headquarters (AHQ) when it is evident that deployment activity may
exceed system wide available resource guidelines and/or high activity levels warrant.
a. Emergency Deployment may be activated for an individual jurisdiction, multiple
jurisdictions or system wide within the Automatic Aid System.
2. Emergency Deployment will be de-activated at the direction of the Operations Deputy
Chief in conjunction with AHQ. All modified response requirements will return to normal
operating guidelines.
There are three (3) types of Emergency Deployment. The Operations Deputy Chief will
determine the appropriate type of Emergency Deployment and communicate this to AHQ.
TYPE 1 EMERGENCY DEPLOYMENT
Activation of a Type 1 Emergency Deployment will automatically modify response requirements
for all non-EMS incidents through the following deployment directives:
1. All 3-1 response assignments will be modified to 2-1-1 (ENG/LAD/BC) response
assignments.
2. All First Alarm response assignments will be modified to 3-1-1 (ENG/LAD/BC) response
assignments.
3. All TRT2 response assignments will be modified to TRT1 response assignments.
4. All HAZ2 response assignment will be modified to HAZ1 response assignments.
5. All TRT1 and HAZ1 response assignment will be modified to a new TRT0 and HAZ0
response assignment. These assignments include MPW, closest appropriate Special
Operations crew (either TRT or HMT), the applicable Support Truck and either C957N
or C957S. If C957N and C957S are unavailable BC2 or other appropriate BC will be
suggested.
TYPE 2 EMERGENCY DEPLOYMENT
Activation of a Type 2 Emergency Deployment will require the on-duty Operations Deputy Chief
to call off-duty personnel in to staff brush trucks or other adjunct response apparatus.
Coordination between the Assistant Chief of Operations, the on-duty Operations Deputy Chief,
on-duty AHQ Chief and/or Supervisor and the CAD Administrator/Technical Services Chief will

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

EMERGENCY DEPLOYMENT
M.P. 201.02A

03/2021-R

Page 2 of 3

be necessary to determine the appropriate staffing levels, response guidelines, equipment
needs and applicable CAD programming. A Type 2 Emergency Deployment will be developed
on a case by case basis and may be used for but not limited to Fire, EMS and HAZMAT
situations.
Type 2 Emergency Deployment can be activated to address any specific operational issue
including pandemic response and in instances where a specific call type is back logging the
system due to a high volume of calls or inadequate number of response equipment available in
the system. In these cases, case specific or lower priority calls may be assigned to these units
and dispatched based on their availability.
CAD programming and the immediate updating of response guidelines to AHQ will be required
prior to implementing a Type 2 Emergency Deployment. Emergency Deployment will be deactivated at the direction of the Operations Deputy Chief in conjunction with AHQ. Brush truck
capabilities will return to normal and will be placed in an UNV status if not assigned to a call. If
other adjunct response apparatus is utilized the capabilities will return to normal and will be
placed in the appropriate normal operating status.
TYPE 3 EMERGENCY DEPLOYMENT
Activation of a Type 3 Emergency Deployment will require the on-duty Operations Deputy Chief
or designee to call off-duty personnel in to staff reserve apparatus. This will be a manual
process and require coordination between the on-duty Deputy Chief or designee, Fleet
Management and the AHQ as units are made available. Emergency Deployment will be deactivated at the direction of the on-duty Operations Deputy Chief in conjunction with the AHQ.
All reserve apparatus will place themselves in an UNV status if not assigned to a call.
SYSTEMWIDE REDUCTION IN WORKFORCE
Automatic Aid System is committed to making system-wide coverage decisions in the best
interest of all customers and firefighter safety. The system is obligated to prepare for a potential
reduction in available workforce. Reduction in workforce may have a substantial impact causing
a staffing failure within the system. To prevent a staffing failure, all partners must have an
emergency staffing and/or mandatory overtime policy. If local emergency staffing policies fail,
sworn staff shall be redeployed from support functions to keep emergency response resources
in service. If the steps above fail to provide necessary staffing, in-service emergency response
resources will be redeployed to address immediate coverage gaps. This process will be
administered by the Phoenix and Mesa Regional Dispatch Centers using a parallel
methodology to a move-up assignment or system-wide emergency redeployment.
Regional Fire Departments may then recall available off-duty personnel to staff system-wide
emergency response resources to 100% capacity. To support this, Automatic Aid Partners may
utilize the Arizona Mutual Aid Compact for municipal reimbursement.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

EMERGENCY DEPLOYMENT
M.P. 201.02A

03/2021-R

Page 3 of 3

OPERATIONAL INFORMATION
System wide available resource guidelines:
1. Any one (1) large scale incident may use sixty percent (60%) of Automatic Aid
resources. Forty percent (40%) of Automatic Aid resources must remain in service to
handle routine emergency activity within the system.
2. If two (2) large scale incidents are working simultaneously, each incident may use thirtyfive percent (35%) of Automatic Aid resources. Thirty percent (30%) of Automatic Aid
resources must remain in service to handle routine emergency activity within the
system.
3. If three (3) large scale incidents are working simultaneously, each incident may use
twenty-five percent (25%) of Automatic Aid resources. Twenty-five percent (25%) of
Automatic Aid resources must remain in service to handle routine emergency activity
within the system.
It will be the responsibility of AHQ to coordinate the efficient movement of resources.
EMERGENCY DEPLOYMENT PRINCIPLES
1. Emergency Deployment has been automated in CAD and can be initiated as an
independent activation type, or as concurrent activation types, as necessary to mitigate
the incident or situation.
2. Activation of each Type of Emergency Deployment will activate a system wide
Qpage/phone page so that all jurisdictions within the Automatic Aid System are aware of
high activity levels and potential impact to individual jurisdictions.
3. Activation of each Type of Emergency Deployment will generate a MCT message so
that all jurisdictions within the Automatic Aid System are aware of high activity levels and
potential impact to individual jurisdictions.
4. Activation of each Type of Emergency Deployment will prompt AHQ to open all station
packages with a voice announcement advising of Emergency Deployment mode so that
all jurisdictions within the Automatic Aid System are aware of high activity levels and
potential impact to individual jurisdictions.
5. AHQ has the ability to over-ride a modified response at dispatch, if applicable based on
information received.
6. Responding units or a unit on-scene has the ability to balance a modified response to a
full assignment if necessary.
7. Emergency Deployment can be implemented for a single jurisdiction, multiple
jurisdictions or system wide.

