PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

2 In / 2 Out
M.P. 201.04

01/14-R

Page 1 of 2

Purpose
The purpose of the this procedure is to define the considerations for meeting the 2 in / 2 out procedure
requirement based on OSHA 29 CFR 1910.134(g)(4). This procedure is meant as the standard application for the
Phoenix Regional Dispatch System for the OSHA standard to meet all requirements and at the same time provide
for all tactical needs in the hazard zone.
Objective
OSHA states that “once fire fighters begin the interior attack on an interior structural fire, the atmosphere is
assumed to be IDLH and paragraph 29 CFR 1910.134(g)(4) [two-in/two-out] applies.”
The objective of 2 in / 2 out is to have fully equipped firefighters in position during the initial fire attack to react in
the event of a Mayday situation.
The 2 in / 2 out procedure will be established anytime firefighters are on air inside a structure and no other units
have arrived onscene. In the event the initial company arrives onscene of a fire in the incipient stages the 2 in / 2
out procedure is not required. OSHA further defines an incipient stage fire in 29 CFR 1910.155(c)(26) as a “fire
which is in the initial or beginning stage and which can be controlled or extinguished by portable fire
extinguishers, Class II standpipe or small hose systems without the need for protective clothing or breathing
apparatus.”

Standard Exceptions to the 2 in / 2 out Requirement at Structure Fires
1. When there is a reported or suspected life hazard where immediate action could prevent the loss of life.
2. When the fire is in an incipient stage as defined above.
During the initial deployment of the first in company, the only radio communications with regards to 2 in / 2 out
that are necessary is when the 2 in / 2 out standard is not met. The only acceptable reasons for not meeting the 2
in / 2 out standard would be as defined above. Also, the 2 in / 2 out standard is met when the second arriving fire
company arrives and is positioned onscene or in Level 1 staging.
When the standard is met, it is critical that the accountability for the 2 in / 2 out team members is managed by the
Incident Commander whether they are in the fast attack or stationary command mode. It is the requirement that
the Incident Commander (initial arriving Company Officer) account for the individual members of the 2 in / 2 out
team. It is also the requirement for the individual 2 in / 2 out team members make the Incident Commander
aware of their position and function for accountability.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

2 In / 2 Out
M.P. 201.04

01/14-R

Page 2 of 2

Operational 2 in / 2 out
 Temporary two-person tactical reserve assigned at the outset of an incident to allow teams to enter an
IDLH, or potential IDLH atmosphere.
One primary member of the 2 in / 2 out pair must be solely dedicated to tracking interior personnel. Their
function is to react in a safe and effective manner based on their capabilities and ability to communicate in the
event of a Mayday by firefighters making the initial fire attack. This position requires appropriate PPE, a radio with
the appropriate hazard zone capabilities and to work within the incident management system.
The standards state that the second member of the 2 in / 2 out team may be engaged in other activities within the
hazard zone including Engineers operating the pumper.
If members of the 2 in / 2 out team are required to assist with a Mayday situation, it is imperative that they
communicate their actions with Command or AHQ. 2 in / 2 out members must maintain a level of accountability
to Command even when acting in a Mayday situation.
Standard Implementation of 2 in / 2 out for a Four-Person Crew
The 2 in / 2 out procedure should be used when the initial arriving Company Officer is operating in the fast attack
mode as the Incident Commander on an interior attack with another crew member. The plug person assumes the
primary 2 in / 2 out position and the engineer assumes the secondary 2 in / 2 out position.
It is necessary that any rescue efforts be initiated as a team (2 members) and well communicated prior to action.
Mayday response should always be managed with the Risk Management Plan by the incident commander and
acted upon based on the capabilities of the 2 in / 2 out team.

