PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

ACCOUNTABILITY
M.P. 201.03

01/21-R

Page 1 of 6

PURPOSE
This procedure identifies the accountability system. It is the responsibility of all members operating at
an emergency incident to actively participate in the accountability system. It is the responsibility of the
Incident Commander to maintain an awareness of the location and function of all companies or crews
when operating on any emergency incident. Sector Officers and Company Officers assigned the
responsibility of a specific function or tactical area will account for those personnel working in their area
of responsibility. In addition, this procedure identifies those actions that are specific to accountability
on the fireground or other hazardzone operations.
Generally speaking, the accountability
responsibilities and actions within this procedure apply to any area that requires the use of an SCBA.
The accountability system has proven to increase firefighter safety and provide the Incident Command
Team, Sector Officer/Division/Group Supervisor, and Company Officers a means to track the location
and function of firefighters on the scene.
ACCOUNTABILITY RESPONSIBILITIES
Accountability is a critical element in maintaining the safety of all firefighters working on the fireground.
Each person involved in an incident whether at the strategic, tactical, or task level of an incident must
make a strong personal commitment to follow all policies and procedures regarding accountability.
Command/Strategic Level:
• Addresses the strategic level of accountability by the tracking of all crews and
sectors/divisions/groups by location and function on a tactical worksheet.
• Command must know who is in charge of each sector/division/group, crews assigned to each
sector/division/group, where each sector/division/group is located, and what each
sector/division/group is assigned to do.
• Command will include accountability as a major element in strategy and attack planning and
must consider and react to any barriers to effective accountability.
• Command will consider air supply when making tactical assignments including rotation of
crews.
• Command
must
obtain
personal
accountability
reports
(PAR)
from
Sector
Officers/Division/Group Supervisors and crews.
Sector Officer/Division/Group Supervisor/Tactical Level:
• Addresses the tactical level of accountability by tracking of crews assigned to their sector.
• Sector Officers/Division/Group Supervisors must know the location and function of assigned
crews.
• Sector Officers/Division/Group Supervisors must be in his/her assigned area to maintain close
supervision of assigned crews.
• Sector Officers/Division/Group Supervisors must obtain PARs of all crewmembers of all
companies assigned to his/her sector/division/group.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

ACCOUNTABILITY
M.P. 201.03

01/21-R

Page 2 of 6

Company Officer/Task Level:
• Address the task level of accountability and must know where each firefighter is located and
what each firefighter is doing.
• Company Officers shall maintain a current PASSPORT of personnel responding on the
apparatus at all times.
• Company Officers shall maintain a current MCT roster of personnel responding on the
apparatus at all times. This includes MCT roster alignment with the members assigned radio.
• Company Officers must ensure that all crewmembers have proper helmet company ID and
nametags on helmet.
• Company Officers must obtain PARs for their crews, which is a confirmation that all members
assigned to his/her crew are accounted for and have an adequate exit air supply.
• Company Officers must keep crew intact and maintain an awareness of the crews exit air
supply.
• Company Officers must ensure that passport is delivered to their accountability location prior to
entering the hot zone and retrieved upon exiting the hot zone.
Engineer:
• Accountability officer who tracks crews and crewmembers who take handlines from his/her
apparatus.
• Collects passports from crews prior to entering the hot zone
• Places passport/pouch on discharge gate when hoseline is charged. If no passport is available,
engineer should note crew id on pump panel with grease pencil at discharge gate.
• Places hoseline ID tags on each hoseline.
Firefighter:
• Must have proper company ID on his/her helmet.
• Ensure that nametag is placed on passport and roster is updated.
• Stay with his/her crew at all times.
• Maintain a constant awareness of his/her exit air supply.
All Members:
• Immediately update the company passport as they arrive for duty.
• Ensure that helmet IDs are accurate.
• Ensure that nametags are on helmet.
• Ensure that SCBA identification markings are in place.
• All crews work within the incident command system, no free lancing.
• Crews arriving on the scene should remain intact. A minimum crew size will be considered two
or more members.
• Each member must have a radio.
• All crews entering the hot zone must have a supervisor.
• All crews will go in together, stay together, and come out together.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

ACCOUNTABILITY
M.P. 201.03
•
•

01/21-R

Page 3 of 6

Reduced visibility and increased risk will require close supervision by the Company Officer.
The entire crew will exit if a SCBA, radio, or any equipment that could compromise safety fails
while in the hot zone.

ACCOUNTABILITY EQUIPMENT
The passport system will be used to effectively track firefighters in the hot zone. Accountability
equipment for each piece of apparatus and shift consists of a passport with a pouch, small company id
tag, helmet ID stickers, and hose ID tag. Passports are bright yellow tags, which measure
approximately 3 by 4 inches that are marked with company identification and shift. Nametags of
crewmembers assigned to each apparatus are affixed to the passport, which is placed in the passport
pouch. The small company id tag is kept in a pocket on the back of the passport pouch and is used to
replace the passport at the pump panel in the event that accountability is tracked closer to the building
by a sector/division/group. The passport, passport pouch, and company hoseline id tag are kept
together as a unit on the apparatus dash at the Company Officer position or passenger side. A Velcro
strip will allow the passport/pouch to be affixed to the dash and easily removed.
Each firefighter is issued individual nametags. One nametag for each member presently assigned to
the company is required to be placed on the passport. Extra individual nametags should be kept on the
underside of their helmet.
Firefighter helmets shall always reflect the ID of the company the firefighter is presently assigned. All
personnel, including rovers and constant staffers are required to keep their helmet IDs accurate. Extra
helmet ID stickers are kept with the passport in the passport pouch. Nametags shall be affixed to
firefighter helmets.
ACCOUNTABILITY HARDWARE USE
Each Company Officer will be responsible for ensuring that the passport and MCT roster reflects only
the members presently assigned to the company. Passports shall reflect only those crewmembers
about to enter the hot zone. When entering the hot zone with a partial crew, such as when an engineer
remains at the engine to pump lines, the Company Officer must remove the nametags of those
members not entering the hot zone. The nametags of these members may be returned to the member,
placed on the Company Officer's helmet Velcro strip or placed in his/her coat pocket.
Implementation of the passport system will occur at any incident that requires the use of an SCBA. The
use of the accountability system will commence as the first unit arrives on the scene. The first arriving
company will give an on-scene report by radio and assume command. In the follow up report, their
accountability unit identification and geographic location, north, south, east, or west will be announced.
As staged units are assigned, Command will give assignments, which will include their respective
accountability unit identification and geographic location. Each crew will deliver their passport to the
engineer of the engine where they deployed a handline.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

ACCOUNTABILITY
M.P. 201.03

01/21-R

Page 4 of 6

When the engineer charges the stretched hoseline with water, their unit’s passport, passport pouch,
and hoseline ID tag are placed on the discharge gate at the pump panel. In the event a passport is not
available, the engineer will use a grease pencil or other material to mark the pump panel. The
passports on the discharge gates identify crews and crew members on each hoseline, allow engineers
to identify hoselines to change pump pressure, and makes the pump panel an accountability station for
the engineer to track crews. Hoseline ID tags are removed from the passport at the discharge gate and
placed on each respective hoseline by the engineer. These hoseline ID tags provide a means to
identify hoselines that crews entered the building on and are a reference point to find lost or trapped
firefighters. As additional companies arrive, their passports/pouches are delivered to the engineer of
apparatus that the crew took the handline off. The engineer becomes the accountability officer for
those crews that took hoselines from his/her apparatus.
Ladder crews will leave their passport on the apparatus dash when going to the roof to perform
ventilation. When going to the interior of the structure, each ladder crew will deliver their passport to
the engine closest to their point of entry.
Once a passport is delivered to the pump operator, the passport will remain on the designated
discharge gate indicating the "point of entry" to the hot zone. Upon exit, the Company Officer must
retrieve their passport. Both the Company Officer and accountability officer will be responsible to see
the passports are retrieved. Crews exiting at a different location other than the original point of entry
must immediately notify their original Sector Officer Division/Group Supervisor and/or Accountability
Officer of their changed status. The passport must be retrieved.
BACK UP ACCOUNTABILITY KIT
A backup accountability kit has been issued to each engine to provide a means to maintain
accountability in the event that a crew arrives at an accountability location without their accountability
equipment. Each back up kit is kept in a blue nylon bag that contains the following equipment:
• Three blank hoseline id tags – to mark company ID with grease pencil
• One passport pouch
• One blank passport – to mark crew member IDs with grease pencil
• One blank passport with Velcro – to attach crew member nametags from underside of helmet
• One grease pencil
Command Officers should carry a backup accountability pack to maintain and track accountability
when assigned to a forward position. The backup accountability pack should contain the following
equipment:
• Two blank passports with Velcro – to mark with grease pencil
• One wrist mounted accountability board with Velcro
• Three hoseline tags – to mark company ID with grease pencil
• Two grease pencils

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

ACCOUNTABILITY
M.P. 201.03

01/21-R

Page 5 of 6

ACCOUNTABILITY TRACKED BY SECTORS DIVISIONS/GROUPS
As Battalion Chiefs are assigned to manage sectors/divisions/groups, the FIT will assume safety
sector/division/group responsibilities for that sector/division/group, which includes accountability. At
these incidents and at incidents involving a lost or trapped firefighter, “May Day” situations,
accountability may be managed by a Battalion Chief and FIT in a sector/division/group closer to the
building. The Battalion Chief and FIT would collect the passports/pouches from the initial engine
accountability locations. The small company ID tag is removed from the back of the passport pouch
and replaces the passport/pouch on the discharge gate at the pump panel. Accountability is now
established and tracked closer to the building using their accountability pack.
TERMINATING THE PASSPORT SYSTEM
Passport accountability will be maintained throughout the entire incident. Accountability can be
terminated following a report of "fire under control," at which time a PAR for all crews must be
obtained. Based on a risk management assessment of the scene, Command will determine whether to
continue or terminate the use of the passport system. If visibility remains impaired or if a significant
hazard exists, Command may choose to extend the use of the passport system further. Upon
termination and release from the incident, Company Officers and crewmembers will ensure that the
passport/pouch is accurate and returned to the dash of their apparatus.
PASSPORT RULES
• Passports will reflect only those personnel presently in the hot zone.
• Passports will be delivered to the assigned accountability location prior to entering the hot zone.
• Passports will be maintained at the point of entry to the hot zone.
• Passports never enter the hot zone.
• Passports will be retrieved upon exiting the hot zone.
• Passport accountability location is the engine where the crew deployed hoseline.
PERSONNEL ACCOUNTABILITY REPORT (PAR)
The Personnel Accountability Report (PAR) involves a roll call of all personnel assigned to crews and
sectors/divisions/groups that are working in the hot zone. The PAR is a confirmation that all members
are accounted for and have an adequate exit air supply. For the Sector Officer/Division/Group
Supervisor, a "PAR" is an accounting for all crewmembers of all companies assigned to his/her
sector/division/group. For the Company Officer, a PAR is an accounting of all crewmembers assigned
to his/her company. Reports of PAR's should be conducted face-to-face within the
sector/division/group or company whenever possible.
A personnel accountability report will be required for the following situations:
• Any report of a missing or trapped fire fighter
• Any change from offensive to defensive
• Any sudden hazardous event at the incident - flash over, back draft, collapse, May Day, etc.
• As companies report an all clear

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

ACCOUNTABILITY
M.P. 201.03
•
•
•

01/21-R

Page 6 of 6

As companies report under control
At every 30 minutes of elapsed time
Any time Command feels it is necessary

MULTI-STORY / HIGH-RISE
The use of an accountability system will commence as the first unit arrives on the scene. The unit
containing the passport / pouch and hose ID tag will be removed from the apparatus dash. All crews
reporting to the building will deliver their passports to the building lobby. The hoseline ID tag will be
taken by each crew to mark their hose line in the stairwell at the standpipe. Lobby
Sector/Division/Group will utilize the passports to track all crews and crewmembers in the building.
Crews will leave their passports with fire personnel in the fire control room with Building Systems if
Lobby/Sector Officer/Division/Group has not been established. The lobby sector/division/group will be
responsible for collecting the passports of the initial companies as soon as possible once it is
established.

