PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Lobby Sector
M.P. 201.05C

11/14-R

12/19-SR

The following outlines the directives for Lobby Sector.
PROCEDURE
Lobby Sector is used to control access to a building or area during fires, hazardous materials incidents, rescue
operations or any other situation where it is necessary to control and maintain accountability for the entry and
exit of personnel. The Lobby Sector Officer is responsible for the following:
1. Identified all entrance/exit points
2. Control all access points when alternate entrances are present
3. Identify suitable entrance/exit point or location
4. Maintain full accountability
5. Record names, times and assignment of personnel
6. Collect all accountability tags
7. For High-rise buildings, normally Lobby Sector is the ground floor lobby area
8. Special Ops Incident: Define perimeter with HAZARD ZONE tape
***Limit entry to authorized personnel with appropriate PPE***
OPERATIONAL INFORMATION
Lobby Sector is used to control access to a building or area necessary to maintain and control accountability for
the entry and exit of personnel. Access control is established at an identified entrance/exit point from the
building or area involved. In the case of a high-rise building this is normally the ground floor lobby area. In
other cases it may be any suitable entrance/exit point or a location designated to meet the needs of the
situation.
In the case of a technical operation, e.g., hazardous materials incident, trench rescue, or confined space, the
perimeter shall be defined by HAZARD ZONE tape with an entrance/exit point identified.
The Lobby Sector is the only location where personnel shall enter or exit from the controlled area in order to
maintain full accountability. Lobby Sector personnel must control all access points when alternate entrances are
available.
Lobby Sector personnel will limit entry into a controlled building or area to those authorized by Command and
having the required level of protective clothing and equipment appropriate for the situation.
The Lobby Sector will record the names, times, and assignments of all personnel entering and exiting the
controlled area. Accountability tags will be collected from all personnel entering and should be retrieved on
departure.

Page 1 of 2

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Lobby Sector
M.P. 201.05C

11/14-R

12/19-SR

BUILDING/AREA ACCESS CONTROL
A Lobby Sector should be established by Command at high-rise fires and other situations where control of access
is necessary. When beginning operations at these incidents, at least one firefighter from the initial arriving
companies should be left to establish a Lobby Sector. A company should be assigned to establish Lobby Sector
as quickly as possible and additional resources may be needed in major situations.
When Lobby Sector is established all personnel entering the building or area must report to Lobby Sector before
reporting to any other sector or assignment. Company Officers will keep crews intact while awaiting
assignment. Civilian personnel entering the building area shall be accompanied by a firefighter with a portable
radio.
For primary responsibilities assigned to the Lobby Sector at a High-rise building incident see High-rise Plans
procedure.
Other incidents that may require a Lobby Sector shall include hazardous materials, confined space, trench
rescue, water rescue, structural collapse, and any other incident where control of access is critical.

Page 2 of 2

