PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Support Sector
M.P. 201.05B

04/18

Page 1 of 2

Purpose
This procedure establishes a standard structure and guidelines for the provision of Support
Sector at all incidents requiring response from Resource Management, and incidents involving
special supply needs.
Procedure
The Resource Sector is a part of our Incident Command System and may be assigned under the
Logistics Section Officer. The responsibilities assigned to the Resource Sector will vary to some
degree in each situation depending on type, size and complexity of operations. The specific
responsibilities will include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Assisting the Logistics Section Officer in initial and continuing evaluation of support
needs.
Providing and re-supply of all expendable supplies, such as air, oxygen, medical supplies,
foam, Gatorade, food, etc.
Providing and coordinating field refueling of apparatus.
Liaison with Equipment Management to provide for the ongoing performance of all
Department apparatus.
Providing and coordinating equipment and manpower for delivery of fire hose and other
equipment to the scene and/or back to stations.
Provide for the delivery to the incident site of specialized and backup equipment, as
may be needed.
Coordinate provision of specialized equipment or services required at the scene from
other City departments or outside agencies, and provide liaison as required.
Coordinate the exchange of portable radios and communications equipment requiring
servicing.

It is the responsibility of Command to make an early determination of situations requiring the
establishment of the Resource Sector or the Logistics Section, and to assure that the Resource
Officer (RM-50) on call has been notified and is responding to the incident. Notification can be
made through Deployment. Command may assign an individual or company to establish a
Resource Sector prior to the arrival of the Resource Officer.
It is the responsibility of the Resource Management Deputy Chief to provide the designated
personnel and response capability to meet the requirements of this procedure. This response
capability is available on a 24-hour basis through the on-duty Resource Officer (RM-50).

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Support Sector
M.P. 201.05B

04/18

Page 2 of 2

It is the responsibility of RM-50 to respond to all working first alarm incidents or greater, or any
other incident where response is requested by Command. RM-50 will report to the Command
Post on arrival and verify establishment of the Resource Sector.
RM-50 will check with Command for any particular needs or problems which have been
identified. Unless otherwise directed, RM-50 will automatically assess the situation in terms of
support requirements. RM-50 will coordinate the response of additional Resource personnel
and make assignments to provide for completion of assigned responsibilities.
RM-50 will remain at the Command Post and respond to any particular needs identified by
Command or the Logistics Officer. Progress reports will be made to Command or the Logistics
Officer as necessary. RM-50 is responsible for determination and notification of personnel at
the Resource Management facility, if necessary, to further support Resource Sector needs on
the incident. For major incidents, the Resource Management Deputy Chief will respond to the
incident to manage Resource Sector. Other Resource Management Division Officers and Section
heads may be requested to respond to the scene of all second alarm incidents or greater.
Fleet Management provides 24-hour service to maintain apparatus and equipment and to meet
emergency needs of the Department. This service is maintained by three Fire Engineers
working a 56-hour week. The on-duty Fire Engineer may be contacted at 261-8744.

