PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

INCIDENT SAFETY OFFICER SYSTEM
(formerly Safety Sector/Section)

M.P. 201.05A

5/11–R

Page 1 of 9

PURPOSE
The Phoenix Fire Department (PFD) holds the safety of our members as our highest priority. The
purpose of this procedure is to describe the Incident Safety System that assigns the responsibility for
firefighter Safety to an individual beginning with the first arriving Company Officer and the process by
which this responsibility is transferred, expanded, and continued as the incident grows up to and
including termination of Command. Information related to this M.P. may be found in:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

M.P. 201.01 Command Procedures
M.P. 201.01A On Deck
M.P. 201.04 IRIC, RIC Rescue Sector/Group
M.P. 201.04A Rescue – Lost Firefighters - Command Responsibilities when a May-Day occurs.
M.P. 202.03A May-Day Communications
M.P. 202.05C Air Management
M.P. 205.01H Welfare Sector

OVERVIEW
It is the policy of the Phoenix Fire Department that any member witnessing an unsafe act by another
member that may result in injury or worse to one of our members has the authority and obligation to
intervene and stop the unsafe act. The Incident Safety System is implemented any time the Phoenix
Fire Department responds to an incident. This Procedure describes how an Incident Safety Officer
(ISO) and/or Assistant Incident Safety Officers (AISO) are integrated into our Incident Management
System, automatically, every time we respond to an incident. The language and safety system structure
used in this procedure are intended to conform to NFPA standard 1561, the National Incident
Management System (NIMS), and to embody the intent of NFPA 1521.
Fire departments in the Phoenix Regional Automatic Aid Consortium (the consortium) manage safety
using two different but interoperable systems; the single dedicated Incident Safety Officer (ISO), and
the Incident Safety Officer System (ISOS). It is the intent of this procedure to describe both systems,
outline roles and responsibilities of key safety positions, and to explain the interoperability of the
systems. While these two different systems exist for smaller scale incidents within the region, when
incidents escalate to greater alarms and command van operations are initiated there exists only one
formalized safety system. This is also described in this procedure.
This procedure in no way diminishes the responsibility of each and every member to safe work
behaviors and to operate within standard operating procedures at all times. Company officers carry an
additional responsibility of ensuring that all members of their crew are operating in a safe manner.
Chief Officers and sector officers must also insure that operations are conducted safely.
DEFINITIONS
This section briefly describes the positions listed below. Further details and duties for positions are
included in the body of this procedure.
Incident: An incident is described as “any emergency situation that threatens life, safety, or property”.
Timely response and effective management of EMS, rescue, hazardous material release and fire
control situations represent the most immediate priorities of the fire department.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

INCIDENT SAFETY OFFICER SYSTEM
(formerly Safety Sector/Section)

M.P. 201.05A

5/11–R

Page 2 of 9

Incident Commander (IC): This refers to the position within the Incident Command System (ICS) that
is in charge of incident management. The IC has overall responsibility for the safety of responders
working at an emergency scene. That responsibility cannot be delegated. The SOFR/ISO assists the IC
and acts as the IC's eyes and ears on matters related to safety, and has the authority to manage safety
as described further in this procedure.
Support Officer: A position within ICS that supports the IC. This position functions as the Incident
Safety Officer in the ISOS until command van operations are commenced and a Safety Officer is
assigned.
Sector Officer: This refers to the position within ICS that is assigned to a geographical area or
particular function and manages units assigned to these areas during incidents.
Field Incident Technician (FIT): A company officer assigned to work with a command officer. Often
this position is assigned the Support Officer/ISO or Assistant Incident Safety Officer (AISO) role during
incidents. Some cities in the Automatic Aid Consortium use a Battalion Safety Officer (BSO) to fill this
position.
Safety Officer (SOFR)/ Incident Safety Officer (ISO): A member of the Command Staff responsible
for monitoring and assessing safety hazards or unsafe situations and for developing measures for
ensuring personnel safety.
Assistant Incident Safety Officer (AISO): An individual appointed or assigned at an incident scene by
the Incident Commander (IC) to assist the ISO in the performance of ISO functions.
Initial Rapid Intervention Crew (IRIC): Temporary two-person team assigned at the outset of a
working fire to allow a two-person team to enter the structure to perform primary search and rescue
when information indicates a potential life hazard situation that can be resolved by rapid search and
rescue.
Rapid Intervention Crew (RIC): Four-person crew fully equipped on site, in a ready state, to
immediately react and respond to rescue firefighters.
Incident Safety Plan: Hazard control strategies developed by the ISO to address the incident action
plan and the type of incident encountered.
INCIDENT SAFETY SYSTEM – DEPLOYMENT MODEL
An incident safety system will be implemented every time the Phoenix Fire Department responds to an
incident. The incident safety function begins with the first arriving unit, typically the company officer/IC
as part of the initial size up and continues until the incident is terminated. Safety is integrated in the
strategic decision making process of looking at critical fireground factors present at the incident, and
applying the risk management profile to choose an appropriate strategy and develop an Incident Action
Plan (IAP). This process begins implementation of the incident safety system, and identifies the initial
IC as responsible for the safety function; this IC is the initial IC/ISO. The initial IC/ISO maintains this
responsibility until Command is transferred or the incident is terminated.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

INCIDENT SAFETY OFFICER SYSTEM
(formerly Safety Sector/Section)

M.P. 201.05A

5/11–R

Page 3 of 9

Role and responsibility of the initial IC/ISO:
• Follow Phoenix Regional Standard Operating Procedures
• Use the Standard Risk Management Plan
• Analyze critical fire ground factors present at the incident
• Determine a strategy (Offensive or Defensive)
• Establish the Personnel Accountability System
• Provide a standard initial radio report that includes an On-Scene Report and Follow-up
Report as defined in Command Procedures M.P. 201.01 08/10/R
• Establish Initial Rapid Intervention Crew (IRIC)
• Manage incoming resources until incident command is passed to another arriving
company officer or command officer.
• Provide for the ongoing safety of all members involved in the incident
This initial company officer as the IC/ISO provides the beginning of the Incident Safety Officer System
(ISOS) and insures that firefighter safety is a priority upon arrival of the first unit and is maintained
though standard transfer of Command and ISO responsibilities until the incident is stabilized or
Command is terminated.
EMS (one or two units) and Still Assignments
For incidents such as a still assignment or car fire, and one or two company response to an EMS call,
the company officer maintains the role of IC and ISO. The company officer’s safety responsibilities
include:
• Manage task level safety concerns (driving safety, appropriate PPE, equipment use, etc.)
• Size up critical factors and apply the Risk Management Plan at all incidents
• Manage crew accountability through sight, voice, or touch
• Actively monitor air supply of crew
• Monitor crew member fatigue and need to for recycle
• Communication and mitigation of hazards
• Continue monitoring and reevaluating incident hazards and risk /benefit of actions
• Request additional resources and command components as necessary
Those filling the role of IC/ISO must be a capable of filling the role of company officer.
Structure Fire Assignments (3-1’s, First Alarms)
Individual jurisdictions may customize the primary and secondary response requirements on a given
Nature Code. CAD will automatically dispatch the required units per Nature Code entered for each
jurisdiction. The RSPREQ command may be utilized to determine the specific primary and secondary
response requirements per Nature Code for an individual jurisdiction:
Format:
RSPREQ Nature Code. Jurisdiction Code (3 letters)
Example:
RSPREQ STR1A, PHX
The first arriving company officer, following standard Command Procedures will assume Command and
become IC #1. IC #1’s role includes both Command and Incident Safety Officer. When information
indicates a potential life hazard situation exists that can be resolved by a rapid search and rescue by
the first arriving company (four person crew), the IC may establish an IRIC. A Firefighter and Engineer
can fill this role while the IC and the other firefighter conduct a rapid search and rescue. One member
of the IRIC must monitor the tactical radio channel and both members must be prepared to assist the
interior portion of the crew if needed.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

INCIDENT SAFETY OFFICER SYSTEM
(formerly Safety Sector/Section)

M.P. 201.05A

5/11–R

Page 4 of 9

The first arriving response command officer (usually a Battalion Chief), following standard transfer of
Command procedures will assume Command and becomes the IC. The FIT assigned to the IC
becomes the support officer and assumes the responsibilities of the Incident Safety Officer. Company
officers continue to manage the task level safety of their crews.
Note: In some departments within the consortium, responding BC’s may not have a FIT. If the first
arriving BC does not have a FIT, and assumes Command, he/she assumes both Command and ISO
responsibilities until a support officer/ISO is assigned.
It is the Responsibility of the IC to perform the Functions of Command to achieve the Tactical
Objectives.
• Assume and announce Command and establish an effective initial command position
(Command Post).
• Rapidly evaluate the situation (size up)
• Initiate, maintain, and control effective incident communications.
• Provide and manage a steady, adequate, and timely stream of appropriate resources.
• Identify the incident strategy, develop an Incident Action Plan (IAP), and assign companies and
personnel consistent with plans and standard operating procedures.
• Develop an effective incident organization using Sectors/Divisions/Groups to decentralize and
delegate geographic and functional responsibility.
• Review, and revise (as needed) the strategy to keep the IAP current.
• Provide for the continuity, transfer, and termination of Command.
Roles and Responsibilities of the Support Officer:
• Define, evaluate, and recommend changes to the incident action plan.
• Provide direction relating to tactical priorities and specific critical fireground factors.
• Become the Incident Safety Officer
• Evaluate the need for additional resources.
• Assign logistics responsibilities.
• Assist with the tactical worksheet for control and accountability.
• Evaluate the fireground organization and span of control.
• Other duties as necessary.
The next arriving BC can be assigned Recon when appropriate or assigned to the most critical
Sector/Division or Group. Note: Sectors Divisions and Groups are addressed in M.P. 201.01 Command
Procedures. For the remainder of this M.P. we will refer to Sectors with the understanding that some
departments will substitute divisions and/or groups where appropriate.
Once assigned to a sector, the BC assumes the responsibilities’ of a Sector Officer as described in
Command procedures. The BC’s FIT becomes the Sector Safety Officer and an AISO for the incident.
Role of the FIT as a Sector Safety Officer (AISO) partnered with a BC
• Perform Sector Safety Officer (AISO) function/role
• Assess and address safety concerns within the sector
• Assist the BC with managing the sector (stay together)
• Manage accountability within the sector (hose tags too)
• Provide air management within the sector
• Manage work/rest cycles within the sector
• Manage the sector’s On-Deck crews recycle and rehab

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

INCIDENT SAFETY OFFICER SYSTEM
(formerly Safety Sector/Section)

M.P. 201.05A
•
•

5/11–R

Page 5 of 9

Establish communications with the ISO (you will call them ‘Command’) once the IC has
assigned a Safety Channel
Coordinate with other Sector Safety Officers (AISOs)

On-Deck Companies
”On Deck” is defined as; a forward staging position located just outside the immediate hazard zone,
safely distanced from the entrance of a tactical position/Sector. On Deck crews will be supervised
either by the Sector Officer or Company Officer and they will remain On Deck until assigned by the IC
or Sector Officer. The most likely assignments for On Deck companies are:
• Reinforce a position within an assigned sector
• Crew relief within an assigned sector
• Any other tactical position assigned by the IC
• Rapid Intervention Crew
On Deck provides the IC with the ability to move companies from Level I or Level II staging to a forward
position providing a tactical reserve on the fire ground., On-Deck also allows the IC to maintain a
continuous work cycle in a sector and provide a back-up crew with immediate intervention capability in
any given sector (RIC).
Examples:
Garden apartment complexes, large commercial assignments and high rise fires are all examples of
where ‘On-Deck’ would be used to provide a tactical reserve and a RIC in forward sectors. House fires
are another situation where the use of On-Deck helps the IC function more efficiently. Rather than
piling additional companies into a small structure, the IC can place them On-Deck and wait for reports
from interior crews as to their manpower and resource needs. This placement also eliminates the need
to tie up personnel occupying a RIC (rescue) position.
On-Deck Company Use to Assist with a Rescue
The ability to respond quickly to a May-Day situation is one of the most important reasons to assign
companies to On-Deck positions. Assignment to the task of firefighter rescue requires a level-headed,
coordinated and quick approach. Companies assigned to On-Deck must prepare themselves to
function as rescue crews by performing the following tasks/actions:
• Monitor tactical radio channel;
• Retrieve RIC Bag and confirm contents;
• Confirm TIC is in a ready state;
• Determine which line each interior company is on—(hose tags);
• Coordinate the opening of doors and windows;
• Illuminate entrance/exits;
• Develop and discuss a possible search and rescue plan.
On-Deck Company Actions for Rescue include:
• Confirm May-Day information;
• Determine resource and equipment needs based upon May-Day report;
• Determine last known location of firefighter/crew in trouble;
• Communicate plan with crew;
• Implement Plan;
• Utilize information and technology (radio reports, TIC, flashlights, etc.);
• Monitor air supply;
• Provide C.A.N. report to Command.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

INCIDENT SAFETY OFFICER SYSTEM
(formerly Safety Sector/Section)

M.P. 201.05A

5/11–R

Page 6 of 9

C957 North and South
On all first alarm or greater incidents cars 957 north and south or BC152 will be dispatched and will fill
the role of a mobile AISO when assigned by the IC to provide an additional layer of safety. If C957 or
BC152 feels there is a need to enter the hot zone he/she must team up with the second C957 and
communicate with Command to describe conditions, the reason to enter the hot zone, and their plan.
The C957/BC152 team will not enter the hot zone until the IC approves their plan.
In addition to being company officers, C957 personnel are cross trained in Hazardous Materials and
Technical Rescue. This makes them a valuable resource at all Special Operations calls and may be
paired up to perform recon and mobile incident safety for the IC.
In addition to the above duties, C957 may be assigned the following duties:
• Secure Utilities
• Work with the responsible party at commercial or apartment fires
• Isolate known hazards
• Follow up with defined hazards such as lines down etc.
• Work with utility companies
Greater Alarms and Command Van (CV) operations
When transitioning to the CV the IC and support officer/FIT retain their positions as the IC and the
Support Officer/ISO. The IC and Support Officer now join the Senior Advisor and the three of them
become the Command Team. When an ISO qualified person arrives at the Command Post (CV), the
Senior Advisor may assign him/her to the position of ISO. The Support Officer (FIT) can now focus on
supporting the IC and the ISO can focus on Incident Safety.
The Incident Safety Officer (ISO) function operating in the Command Van (CV) works under the
direction of the Senior Advisor (SA) and provides the incident commander with a second set of eyes
and ears for fire ground operations. The presence of an ISO enables Command to set up a tactical
safety channel that can communicate location, accountability, resource needs, and sector safety
concerns to the command team without using valuable radio time from the tactical channel.
The tactical safety channel also provides for an additional communication tool for sector officers to
communicate with the command team in the event of a significant incident situation (“May Day” building
collapse, explosion, etc) that dominates radio traffic on the assigned incident channel. The channel
should not be used for tactical reports or resource requests unless contact on the tactical channel is
unavailable and the report or need is critical in nature.
STRATEGIC INCIDENT SAFETY OFFICER RESPONSIBILITIES
• Identify the Safety Channel assigned by the dispatch center.
• Obtain a briefing from the Command Team that includes the incident action plan (IAP).
o The ISO monitors the IAP, conditions, activities and operations to determine whether they
fall within the criteria as defined in the department’s risk management plan. The ISO shall
take necessary action, through the IC, if activities do not fall within the risk management
plan.
• Using a tactical worksheet, identify the existing organizational structure.
o This can be accomplished by working with the CV staging officer by using the resource list
function of the staging officer’s computer.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

INCIDENT SAFETY OFFICER SYSTEM
(formerly Safety Sector/Section)

M.P. 201.05A
•

•
•
•

•

5/11–R

Page 7 of 9

Once Command has advised the tactical level (Sector) Safety Officers (AISO’s) to go to the
Safety Channel, contact each sector safety officer and assure that the department’s personnel
accountability system is being used and confirm resources assigned.
o Provide the SA with any differences between the organizational assignments Command has
and what is reported by the sector safety officers.
Provide the SA with any resource requests from sector safety officers.
Offer judgment to the SA on establishing control zones and no-entry zones and ensures that
established zones are communicated to all members present on the scene.
Ensure that the IC establishes the incident scene rehabilitation tactical level management
component during the emergency operation.
o Critical incident stress interventions should be recognized and the IC should be notified if
such circumstances require response.
The ISO shall communicate to the IC the need for additional safety officers and/or tactical
specialists due to the need, size, complexity or duration of the incident.

TACTICAL INCIDENT SAFETY OFFICER RESPONSIBILITIES
• Identify the Safety Channel assigned by Command.
• Size up the sector of responsibility–
o Monitor the Sector Action Plan, conditions, activities and operations to determine
whether they fall within the criteria as defined in the department’s risk management plan.
o Alter, suspend, or terminate activities that are unsafe or involve an imminent hazard.
o Survey the sector – identify hazards and potential hazards
o Communicate the building size, layout, construction type,
• Assure that the department’s personnel accountability system is being used within the sector
and confirm resources assigned.
o Wear full protective clothing and SCBA and operate just outside the “hot zone”
o Confirm sector assignments and companies assigned to sector
o Utilize accountability tools provided at the task level (passports, hose line tags,
accountability boards, etc)
o Develop a rescue plan – revise the plan as conditions change
• Offer judgment to the ISO on establishing control zones and no-entry zones and ensure that
established zones are communicated to all members present in the sector.
o Ensure the safety of crews – make sure the proper equipment is being utilized and that
personnel are operating in a safe position
o Fire line tape (yellow) helps to control bystanders and the scene
o Hazard tape (white/red) helps to control firefighters
o No Access tape (red/black) identifies exclusion zones for all personnel
• Communicate the need for additional safety officers and/or tactical specialists in the Sector due
to size, complexity or duration of the incident to the ISO.
• Establish RIC team deployments in each hazard zone area.
o Assure that the RIC Bag (air and tools) have been deployed in the sector
• Advise the IC of hazards, fire extension and collapse potential.
o Forecast needs
• Evaluate visible smoke (color, volume, density, velocity, location)and fire conditions (location
and size) and advise Command on the potential for flashover, back draft, blow up, or other
events that could pose a threat to operating crews.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

INCIDENT SAFETY OFFICER SYSTEM
(formerly Safety Sector/Section)

M.P. 201.05A
•

•

5/11–R

Page 8 of 9

Monitor the accessibility of entry and egress of structures and its effect on the safety of
members conducting interior operations
o Track personnel accountability closer to building
o Air management – manage time on air/working time and work/rest cycles
o Manage on deck crews – share information, including rescue plan
o Manage the cycling of crews to rehab
o Progress reports
o Constantly monitor crews and building conditions
Develop an overhaul plan for the Sector that falls within the IAP

The additional layers of safety provided at this level of organization are:
• Provides a critical secondary means of communication during a Mayday
• Reconciling accountability (a cross check to make sure people are where command thinks
they are)
• Eliciting safety concerns from the Sector Safety Officers
• Completion of safety worksheet to include identification of safety issues and plan to mitigate
• Second means of strategic/tactical/safety communication with the command team
Transition to multi operation period events and a Type I or III Incident Management Team (IMT).
When the authority having jurisdiction (AHJ) has decided that the scale, complexity, and duration of an
incident warrant the use of an IMT the ISO will participate with the Command Team in an interagency
briefing. The ISO will provide current safety issues during the briefing when appropriate. The IMT
Command Staff including the Safety Officer are the recipients of this briefing. Following the formal
briefing, the ISO will meet with the IMT Safety Officer and provide the current safety worksheet, and if
possible assist in the safety planning process for the upcoming operational period. More about
transitioning to an IMT appears in M.P. 201.01 Command Procedures.

SINGLE ISO – DEPLOYMENT MODEL
Departments in the consortium using the single ISO model either dispatch an ISO or assigns the ISO
position to a qualified Command or Company Officer during incidents. Command should only assign
units qualified and familiar with the ISO. Once the IC assigns an ISO they will be identified as SAFETY
on the tactical channel. Single ISO’s shall remain out of the hot zone unless they are paired up. Single
ISO’s should provide the following functions:
• Incident Recon
• Assess the risk/benefit of operations
• Communicate and report safety issues to command
• Intervene as necessary to provide for safety using one of the three methods described below
SAFETY INTERVENTION
Intervention at scene operations involves three approaches. First is for life threatening situations, the
second is for non-life threatening situations; the third approach occurs in the on-going incident planning
process.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

INCIDENT SAFETY OFFICER SYSTEM
(formerly Safety Sector/Section)

M.P. 201.05A

5/11–R

Page 9 of 9

First Approach- life threatening conditions:
Any LIFE THREATENING conditions will be corrected immediately and directly. Where time permits,
Command must be notified. Corrective action will be initiated by Command immediately. In obvious
life threatening situations that do not allow time for Command's intervention, the Safety Sector/Section
shall immediately stop any action, or countermand any order, under these circumstances by DIRECT
and IMMEDIATE intervention (i.e., order crews out of a building, countermand an order for crews to go
to the roof etc.). Such action may be taken with the understanding that the Safety Sector/group works
for Command and is accountable to Command for actions taken. COMMAND MUST BE
IMMEDIATELY ADVISED OF ANY DIRECT INTERVENTION BY THE SAFETY SECTOR/SECTION
UNDER THESE CIRCUMSTANCES.
A change of strategy and/or tactics by Command or Sector officers may be required as a result of the
Safety officer's actions. Sector officers must be notified of hazards, required safety corrections, or
updated on the strategic plan, tactics, and objectives.
EMERGENCY TRAFFIC SHOULD BE USED FOR ANY CRITICAL EMERGENCY NOTIFICATIONS/
ALERTS REQUIRED AT THE INCIDENT SCENE!
Second approach- non life threatening conditions:
The second approach is for non-life threatening situations and involves a more "one on one" correction
of safety problems with individual firefighters, company officers, and/or sector officers (i.e. require
SCBA, correct ladder position) and often does not affect incident strategy. This approach is the most
frequent type of interaction. Where corrective action does not affect Command's strategy; Command
may not need to be notified. Corrected items should, however, be noted for discussion at a critique of
the incident.
Third approach- on going incident planning:
The third approach occurs in the on-going incident planning process. Upon the implementation of the
Safety Sector/Section, Command must provide the Safety Sector/Section an overview of the incident
action plan and specific details of the safety plan. The Safety officer, upon his/her arrival, will confirm
that a safety plan is in effect, review it, and provide recommendations as needed. In some cases
Command may request that the Safety Sector/Section officer develop a proposed safety plan and
recommendations for Command.
Command must be kept aware of any adjustments that affect overall site operations, or the strategic
plan, via frequent and timely progress reports.
The Safety Sector/group/ AISOs must remain a part of the on-going planning process with Command
and/or the Safety Officer.
The officer, assuming Safety Sector/group responsibilities, may utilize any previous Safety Sector
Officers to his/her best advantage, coordinating resources and incident assignments as approved by
Command.

