PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

STAGING SECTOR
M.P. 205.06A

03/03-R

Page 1 of 2

This procedure defines the responsibilities of the Staging Sector Officer. Level II staging is
implemented by Command and should be utilized for all greater alarm incidents, first alarm medical or
hazardous materials incidents, or other incidents in which Command desires to centralize resources, or
simply park apparatus in a central, unobstructed location.
Level II staging will require all responding companies to report to the central staging location.
Implementation of Level II staging automatically requires the implementation of a "Staging Sector"
Officer. Command should request a separate radio channel and may designate a Staging Sector
Officer. Where an officer is not designated, the first company to arrive at the designated staging
location will automatically become the staging officer.

Where the first company to staging is a ladder company, Staging Sector responsibilities should be
transferred to an engine company officer upon his arrival on the scene.
Radio designation will be "Staging Sector."
Command will request a separate radio channel to be used for Command Post to Staging Sector
communications and advise the Staging Sector Officer.
The staging area should be outside the incident site perimeter, but close enough for quick response to
the scene. The staging area should allow staged companies to access any geographic point of the
incident without delay or vehicle congestion.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

STAGING SECTOR
M.P. 205.06A

03/03-R

Page 2 of 2

The staging officer will also be responsible for the following functions:
1. Locate an area of adequate size for all apparatus, including apparatus that may respond with
additional alarms.
2. Transmit the staging area location to Command and Dispatch, indicating access and routing as
needed.
3. Coordinate with the Police Department to block streets, intersections, and other access required for
the staging area.
4. Ensure that all apparatus is parked in an appropriate manner for quick exit.
5. Maintain a log of companies available in the staging area and inventory all specialized equipment
that might be required at the scene.
6. Maintain crews in a ready state with their apparatus.
7. Provide progress reports to Command indicating number and type of units available.
8. Assume a position that is visible and accessible to incoming and staged companies. This will be
accomplished by leaving the red lights operating on the staging officers apparatus and by wearing a
sector vest.
9. Assign staged companies to incident duty per Command’s direction.
When directed by Command, the Staging Officer will verbally assign companies to report to specific
sectors, telling them where and to whom to report. Staging will then advise Command of the specific
unit assigned. Command will advise each sector officer the companies being assigned to the sector.
The receiving Sector Officer may then communicate directly with the company by radio.
When assigned to incident site duties, companies will activate their MCT "on-scene" button.
The Staging Sector Officer will give Command periodic reports of available companies in staging.
Command will utilize this information to request additional resource as needed.
The Staging Sector Officer should organize staging in a manner that will allow apparatus to effectively
move into and out of staging. Adequate space between apparatus is required. Ladders companies
should be placed in one area, engines in another, and rescues in another area.
Where only staff or specialized equipment is needed at the scene, staging should arrange a "taxi"
service using a single company to deliver multiple crews or specialized equipment to the scene. This
will minimize site congestion.
During major incidents where a "Logistics" Section is implemented, the Staging Sector will be working
under the direction of the Logistics Officer.

