PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES
Policy Name:
Policy Number:
FIREGROUND SAFETY
M.P. 202.05
This policy is for internal use only and does not expand an employee’s legal duty or civil
liability in any way. This policy should not be construed as creating a duty to act or a higher
duty of care, with respect to third party civil claims against employees or the Phoenix Fire
Department (PFD). Remedies for violations of this policy, if proven, are limited to
administrative disciplinary action against PFD employees.
Related Policies: 201.01, 201.05A
Other Reference: NFPA 1500-2018, NFPA 1521Date Implemented: 12/2021-N
Review Date: 12/2026
PURPOSE
The purpose of this procedure is to establish general safety guidelines for operating personnel.
TACTICAL POSITIONING
Positioning of operating companies can severely affect the safety/survival of such companies.
Personnel must use caution when placed in the following positions:
• In the direct flow path of the fire
• Working into wind-driven conditions
• Above the fire (floors/roof)
• Where fire can move in behind or above them
• Where position and retreat cannot be controlled
• When involved with opposing fire streams
• Combining interior and exterior attack
• With limited access--one way in/out
• Operating under involved roof structures
• In areas containing hazardous materials
• Below ground fires (basements, etc.)
• In areas where a flashover or backdraft potential exists
• Above/below ground rescue
The safety of firefighting personnel represents the major reason for an effective and well-timed
offensive/defensive decision and the associate write-off by Command. THE TWO STRATEGIES
ARE BASED ON A STANDARD RISK MANAGEMENT PLAN THAT IS TO BE EMPLOYED AT ALL
STRUCTURE FIRES.

FIREGROUND SAFETY
Page 1 of 10

STANDARD RISK MANAGEMENT PLAN
WE MAY RISK OUR LIVES A LOT, IN A CALCULATED MANNER, TO PROTECT SAVABLE LIVES
WE MAY RISK OUR LIVES A LITTLE, IN A CALCULATED MANNER, TO PROTECT SAVABLE
PROPERTY
WE WILL NOT RISK OUR LIVES AT ALL FOR LIVES OR PROPERTY THAT IS ALREADY LOST
When operating in a defensive strategy, operating positions should be as far from the involved
area as possible while still remaining effective. Position and operate from behind barriers if
available (fences, walls, etc.). The intent is for personnel to utilize safe positioning where
possible/available, in an effort to safeguard against sudden hazardous developments such as
explosion, structural collapse, down-powerlines, smoke, collision of heavy equipment, etc.
When operating in an offensive strategy, a controlled aggressive attack is required for firefighter
safety. An effective, coordinated interior attack operation directed toward knocking down the fire
eliminates most eventual safety problems. The operational focus should be to get water on the
fire from the most effective position available. Water on the fire improves interior conditions for
savable victims and firefighters.
Due to the inherent hazards of the fire or incident scene, efforts must be made by Command to
limit the number of personnel on the fireground to those assigned to a necessary function. All
personnel shall be:
• Responding
• Positioned in Staging
• Assigned to a task or operating within a sector
• Released to in-service status
The intent of this procedure is to minimize fireground confusion/congestion and to limit the
number of personnel exposed to fireground hazards to only those necessary to successfully
control the operation. Individuals or crews shall be restricted from wandering about the
fireground or congregating in non-functional groups. If personnel have not been assigned to a
sector or do not have a necessary staff function to perform, they shall remain outside the
fireground perimeter.
When it is necessary to engage personnel in exceptionally hazardous circumstances (i.e., to
perform a rescue), Command will limit the number of personnel exposed to an absolute minimum
and assure that all feasible safety measures are taken.

FIREGROUND SAFETY
Page 2 of 10

In extremely hazardous situations (e.g., flammable liquids, LP gas, special operations, etc.)
Command will engage only an absolute minimum number of personnel within the hazard zone.
Unmanned fire streams (typically master streams) will be utilized wherever possible.
In situations where crews must operate from opposing or conflicting positions, such as front vs.
rear attack streams, roof crews vs. interior crews, etc., utilize radio or face-to-face communications
to coordinate your actions with those of the opposing crew in an effort to prevent needless
injuries. It is critical that opposing or conflicting operations are avoided whenever possible.
Notification and coordination between Company Officers, Sector Officers, and Command is
necessary to manage conflicting operations.
Ground crews must be notified and evacuated from interior positions before ladder pipes go into
operation. Command or Sector Officers should consider obtaining a PAR prior to ladder pipes
going into service.
Do not operate exterior master streams into an area where interior crews are operating. Caution
needs to be used if exterior hand line application is flowing water into a compartment where
interior crews are operating. This procedure is intended to prevent injuries to firefighters and
structural collapse.
When laddering a roof, the ladder selected shall be one which will extend 2' - 3' above the roof
line. This shall be done in an effort to provide personnel operating on the roof with a visible means
of egress.
If possible, when laddering buildings under fire conditions, place ladders near building corners or
fire walls as these areas are generally more stable in the event of structural failure.
The ROCC recommends that personnel should be tethered to a ladder/platform anchorage point
on the platform any time the device is in motion and whenever you are off the ground unless you
are actively climbing or descending the ladder or entering or exiting the platform.
When operating either above or below ground level, establish at least two separate escape
routes/means where possible, (such as stairways, ladders, exits, etc.), preferably at opposite ends
or diagonal corners of the building or separated by considerable distance.
Hot Zone
The Hot Zone will be defined as any area that requires an SCBA, charged hoseline, special
protective clothing, or in which firefighting personnel are at risk of becoming lost, trapped, or
injured by the environment or structure. The following situations would be included inside the Hot
Zone:
• Entering a structure reported to be on fire
FIREGROUND SAFETY
Page 3 of 10

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Operating in close proximity to an involved structure during exterior operations
Confined Space
Trench Rescues
Operating close to crane operations or close to swift water operations
Building collapse
Operating close to helicopter operations
Extrication

ALL FIREFIGHTERS WORKING IN THE HOT ZONE SHALL BE IN CREWS OF A MINIMUM OF TWO
PERSONNEL, WEARING APPROPRIATE PPE, WITH A RADIO ON THE CORRECT TACTICAL
CHANNEL AND MUST HAVE AN ASSIGNED TASK OR FUNCTION. THE ACCOUNTABILITY
SYSTEM WILL BE IN PLACE.
Warm Zone
The Warm Zone will be defined as the area just outside of the Hot Zone where the firefighters start
their operations on the fireground. This zone is where the firefighter is not at risk of becoming
lost, trapped, or injured by the environment or structure. The following functions could be done
inside the Warm Zone:
• Forward fire apparatus working the incident (e.g., engines, ladders, etc.)
• Laying lines
• Hazmat and TRT developing strategies & tactics
• Utility trucks
• Special equipment needs
• Accountability Officer
• Fire Investigations
If at any time firefighters in the Warm Zone become threatened, this area would become a Hot
Zone.
Cold Zone
The Cold Zone will be defined as outside of the Warm Zone where no one is at risk because of the
incident. The following functions could be done inside the Cold Zone:
• Command
• Level I & Level II staging
• Support and staff personnel
• Canteen
• Rehab
• Media

FIREGROUND SAFETY
Page 4 of 10

All operating personnel must remain vigilant on emergency incidents. Just because your
operating in a Cold Zone does not mean there is no risk. Apparatus movements, traffic, and
unforeseen violence are just a few examples of potential hazards at all incidents.
No-Entry Zone
The No-Entry Zone is defined as the area at an incident that no person shall be permitted to enter
due to an imminent hazard, dangerous condition, or the need to protect evidence. Operating
personnel need to be informed of the No-Entry Zone; during nighttime operations consideration
should be given to illumination of the No-Entry Zone.
When possible, control zones should be identified with colored hazard tape or other appropriate
means parallel to NFPA 1521 guidance.
• Hot Zone: Red
• Warm Zone: Yellow
• Cold Zone: Green
• No-Entry Zone: Red and white diagonal-striped or chevron
SECTORS
The safety of firefighting personnel represents a major reason for fireground sectorization. Sector
Officers must maintain the capability to communicate with forces under their command so that
they can control both the position and function of their companies.
Sector Officers and Company Officers shall be able to account for the whereabouts and welfare of
all crews/crew members under their assignment.
Company Officers shall insure that all crew members are operating within their assigned sector
only. Crews will not leave their respective sectors unless authorized by the Sector Officer.
When crews are operating within a sector, Company Officers shall keep the Sector Officer
informed of changing conditions within the sector area, and particularly those changing
conditions which may affect the safety of personnel.
Hazards that will affect only a specific sector area should be dealt with within that sector and need
not necessarily affect the entire operation.
SAFETY SECTOR
The recognition of situations which present inordinate hazards to fireground personnel and the
proper response to safeguard personnel from those hazards is of critical importance to all Fire
Department operations.

FIREGROUND SAFETY
Page 5 of 10

Command has the responsibility to recognize situations involving a high risk to personnel and to
initiate appropriate safety measures.
Command shall establish appropriate additional safety oversite at incidents involving an
inordinate danger to personnel. Command may consider establishing a Safety Sector on any
situation where it may be advantageous to the overall safety of operations.
When the need for specialized assistance is identified, Command should confirm the response of
the appropriate personnel (Safety Officer/Structural Engineer).
Command may designate any available personnel to establish a Safety Sector when the need is
indicated. This should be a high priority assignment.
The establishment of a Safety Sector in no way diminishes the responsibility of all officers for the
safety of their assigned personnel. Each and every member shall utilize common (safety) sense
and work within the intent of established safety procedures at all times.
STRUCTURAL COLLAPSE
Structural collapse has been a major cause of serious injury and death to firefighters. The
possibility of structural collapse should be a major consideration in the development of any
incident action plan. All fireground personnel should consider the possibility of structural collapse
in the decision-making process.
Structural collapse is always a possibility when a building is subject to intense fire. In fact, if fire
is allowed to affect a structure long enough, structural failure is inevitable.
Regardless of the age and exterior appearance of the building, the possibility exists that a principal
structural supporting member is being seriously affected by heat and may collapse, inflicting
serious injury to firefighters.
Example: A 100' length of unprotected steel will expand 9" when heated to 1100o F.
In the typical fire involved building, the roof is the most likely candidate for failure, however failure
of the roof may very likely trigger a collapse of one or more wall sections. This is especially true
if the roof is a peak or dome type which may exert outward pressure against both the bearing and
non- bearing walls upon collapse. In multi-story buildings or buildings with basements, the floor
section above the fire may collapse if supporting members are directly exposed to heat and
flames.
A knowledge of various types of building construction can be invaluable to all firefighters from a
safety standpoint as certain types of construction can be expected to fail sooner than others. For
FIREGROUND SAFETY
Page 6 of 10

example, light weight truss and bar joist roof construction can be expected to fail after minimal
fire exposure.
Structures have been known to collapse without warning but usually there are indications which
may tip off an alert firefighter. Action shall be taken to avert any imminent hazard.
Signs of building collapse may include:
• Cracks in exterior walls
• Bulges in exterior walls
• Sounds of structural movement--creaking, groaning, snapping, etc.
• Smoke or water leaking through walls
• Water accumulation on a roof
• Windows, doors, floors and stairs out of level
• Flexible movement of any floor or roof where firefighters walk
• Interior or exterior bearing walls or columns--leaning, twisting or flexing
• Sagging or otherwise distorted rooflines
• Time of fire involvement
The following construction features or conditions have been known to fail prematurely or to
contribute to early structural failure when affected by fire.
Contributing Factors:
• Parapet walls
• Large open (unsupported) areas--supermarkets, warehouses, etc.
• Large signs or marquees--which may pull away from weakened walls
• Cantilevered canopies--which usually depend on the roof for support and may collapse as
the roof fails
• Ornamental or secondary front or sidewalls--which may pull away and collapse
• Buildings with light weight truss, bar joist, or bow string truss, roofs
• Buildings supported by unprotected metal--beams, columns, et
• Buildings that are under construction, renovation or are otherwise not completed
Buildings containing one or more of the above features must be constantly evaluated for collapse
potential. These evaluations should be a major consideration in determining the strategy, i.e.
offensive/defensive.
It is a principal Command responsibility to continually evaluate and determine if the fire building
is tenable for interior operations. This on-going evaluation of structural/fire conditions requires
the input of Company Officers advising their Sector Officers and of Sector Officers advising
Command of the conditions in their area of operation.

FIREGROUND SAFETY
Page 7 of 10

Most structures are not designed to withstand the effects of fire and can be expected to fail if
exposed to heavy fire involvement. If after 10-15 minutes of interior operations heavy fire
conditions still exist, Command should initiate a careful evaluation of structural conditions, and
should be fully prepared to withdraw interior crews and change to a defensive strategy.
If structural failure of a building or section of a building appears likely, a No-Entry Zone must be
established a safe distance from the area which may collapse. All personnel must remain outside
this perimeter.
EVACUATION OF FIREFIGHTING PERSONNEL
Interior firefighting operations should be abandoned when the extent of the fire prohibits control,
or the structure becomes unsafe to operate within. When such conditions make the building
untenable, evacuate, account for personnel, regroup, recommunicate, and redeploy.
Our primary concern, when a hazard which may affect the safety of fire personnel becomes
apparent, is the welfare of those personnel. In an effort to protect personnel who may suffer the
adverse effects of hazards such as structural collapse, explosion, backdraft, etc., a structured
method of area evacuation must be utilized, one which will provide for the rapid/effective
notification of those personnel involved, and one which will be able to accurately account for those
personnel.
Crews retreating from interior operations often require hoseline protection. The protection
afforded to firefighting personnel in such situations represents a major function of back-up lines.
The method of evacuation selected will vary depending on the following circumstances:
• Imminence of the hazard
• Type and extent of hazard
• Perception of the area affected by the hazard
The "Emergency Traffic” announcement is designed to provide immediate notification for all
fireground personnel. The use of "Emergency Traffic" should be initiated only when the hazard
appears to be imminent or has just occurred. Any member has the authority to utilize the
"Emergency Traffic" announcement when it is felt that a notable danger to personnel is apparent;
however, considerable discretion should be applied to its use - emergency traffic announcements
become ineffective if overused.
When an imminent hazard has been realized, the emergency traffic process should be initiated.
Usually, a Company or Sector Officer will be the initiator. The initiator should describe the
apparent hazard and order a suitable response, usually to evacuate a particular area or section,
according to the scope of the hazard.

FIREGROUND SAFETY
Page 8 of 10

If possible, the Sector Officers of those areas to be evacuated should request an acknowledgment
of the emergency traffic dispatch from those crews to be evacuated.
Upon receipt of the emergency traffic evacuation order, Company Officers shall assemble their
crews and promptly exit to a safe location, where the Company Officer will report a PAR for all
crew members. Shortly after the evacuation order, Sector Officers shall begin the process of
accounting for all evacuated crews. When all affected crews and crew members are accounted
for, the Sector Officer will report a PAR for that Sector. At this time a more specific determination
as to the reality/extent of the hazard can be made and efforts initiated to redeploy/redirect efforts.
Building evacuation generally involves a shift from an offensive to a defensive strategy. In such
cases, Command must develop a corresponding operational plan and must communicate that
plan to all operating companies. It is extremely important that everyone is notified and recognizes
that a shift in strategy has been made. This transition can be time consuming based on company’s
interior positions.
Hazards of a less than imminent nature should usually be handled by a consultation of Command,
Sector Officers, Safety Officers, Company Officers or other personnel. Personnel should make a
determination of the nature and possible effect of the suspected hazard and advise Command so
that a more well-informed decision can be made.
SEARCH AND RESCUE
Search and rescue should be performed according to an efficient, well planned procedure which
includes the safety of search crew personnel. The object of the search effort is to locate possible
victims, not create additional ones by neglecting the safety of the search crew.
Fire victims are typically killed through thermal and/or toxic exposure. The closer a victim is to
the fire the greater the chance of thermal exposure. Toxic exposure is not directly connected to
the proximity to the fire but in any area affected by smoke and the products of combustion. In
either form of exposure, the most survivable space in any structure or compartment is at the floor
level.
Prior to entering the search area, all search team members should be familiar with a specific
search plan including the overall objective, a designation of the search area, individual
assignments, etc. This may require a brief conference among crew members before entering the
search area to develop and communicate the plan. Individual search activities should be
conducted by two or more members when possible.
For residential search and rescue operations, firefighters may search off the hoseline. Company
Officers must maintain an awareness of the position and function of all members within their crew

FIREGROUND SAFETY
Page 9 of 10

during search operations. For non-residential fire operations, firefighters should not be operating
off of the hoseline.
A brief look around the floor below the fire may provide good reference for the search team, as
floors in multi-story occupancies usually have a similar layout.
Whenever a search is conducted that exposes search crews to fire conditions (particularly above
the fire floor) the search team should be protected with a charged hose line.

FIREGROUND SAFETY
Page 10 of 10

