PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES
Policy Name:
Policy Number:
DRIVER SAFETY
M.P. 205.08
This policy is for internal use only and does not expand an employee’s legal duty or civil
liability in any way. This policy should not be construed as creating a duty to act or a higher
duty of care, with respect to third party civil claims against employees or the Phoenix Fire
Department (PFD). Remedies for violations of this policy, if proven, are limited to
administrative disciplinary action against PFD employees.
Related Policies: M.P. 205.08A
Other Reference: A.R.S 28-624
Date Implemented: 12/2021-R
Review Date: 12/2026

PURPOSE
This procedure identifies the minimum standards for the operation and supervision of emergency
vehicle movement and safety.
ARIZONA MOTOR VEHICLE CODE AND SAFETY
It is the responsibility of the driver of each Fire Department vehicle to drive safe, in a reasonable
and prudent manner at all times. Vehicles shall be operated in compliance with the Arizona Motor
Vehicle Code. This code provides specific legal exceptions to regular traffic regulations, which
apply to properly equipped and authorized Fire Department vehicles only when responding to an
emergency incident or when transporting a patient to a medical facility. Emergency response
(Code 3) does not absolve the driver of the responsibility to drive with due caution and reasonable
care. The driver of the emergency vehicle is responsible for its safe operation at all times. This
responsibility includes but is not limited to the following:
1. All City of Phoenix employees are required to wear seat belts at all times when operating
a City vehicle.
2. Anyone riding as a passenger/attendant in a City vehicle is also required to wear seat belts
(e.g., Rescue, Engine, Ladder, Utility, Squad, Staff Vehicle, etc.). The Driver and/or
Company Officer of the vehicle will confirm that all personnel and riders are on-board,
properly attired, with seat belts on, before the vehicle is permitted to move.
3. Drivers shall avoid backing whenever possible. Where backing is unavoidable, spotters
shall always be used. If no spotter is available, the driver shall dismount and walk
completely around the apparatus to determine if obstructions are present before backing
(Refer to M.P. 205.08A Standard Signals for Backing of Fire Department Apparatus).
4. All personnel shall ride only in regular seats provided with seat belts. Riding on tailboards
or in other exposed positions is not permitted on any vehicle at any time.

DRIVER SAFETY
Page 1 of 5

5. The unique hazards of driving on or adjacent to the fire ground require the driver to use
extreme caution and to be alert and prepared to react to the unexpected.
6. Drivers must consider the dangers their moving vehicle poses to fire ground personnel and
spectators who may be preoccupied with the emergency and may inadvertently step in
front of or behind a moving vehicle.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE POLICY
Phoenix Fire Department vehicles shall be operated in a manner that provides for the safety of all
persons and property. Prompt, safe response shall be attained by:
1. Leaving the station in a standard professional manner;
2. Quickly mounting apparatus;
3. All personnel on board, seated with seat belts on;
4. Station apparatus bay doors open fully;
5. Driving defensively and professionally at reasonable speeds;
6. Knowing where we are going (i.e., your destination and routing), effectively managing
multiple other tasks (e.g., Mobile Computer Terminal monitoring, alarm room updates,
road closers, staging locations, hydrant locations, etc.); and
7. Using warning devices to move around traffic and to request the right-of-way in a safe and
predictable manner.
Fast response shall not be attained by:
1. Leaving quarters before crew has mounted safely and before apparatus bay doors are fully
open.
2. Driving too fast for conditions.
3. Driving recklessly or without regard for safety.
4. Taking unnecessary chances with negative right-of-way intersections.
CODE 3 EMERGENCY RESPONSE STANDARDS
The following rules govern emergency response:
1. Maximum of 10 mph over posted speed limit.
2. Recognizing there will be a brief deceleration period, maximum of 20 mph when traveling
in center or oncoming traffic lanes.
3. When traveling in center or oncoming traffic lanes, complete stop at all stop signs and
traffic lights regardless of the color of the light.
4. When traveling with traffic, complete stop at all red lights, and stop signs.
RESPONSE ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Response codes will be displayed on the Mobile Computer Terminal (MCT). If no response code
is designated, the response will be Code 2 unless directed by a Company Officer. Officers and
Rescue Attendants must press the correlating response code button on the MCT or through
notification to the Alarm Room on the appropriate tactical radio channel.
DRIVER SAFETY
Page 2 of 5

Response codes for all emergency response vehicles will be determined by the Company Officer
based on information received from the Alarm Room, time of day, traffic conditions, weather
conditions, and other factors.
Rescue units will respond as directed by deployment policy; they do not have the authority to
upgrade their response to Code 3 unless directed by the responding or on scene Company Officer.
When a Rescue is the “first due” unit on a BLS incident they will respond as directed by the Alarm
Room or the responding Company Officer. Rescue crews should keep the responding Company
Officer apprised (by radio) of excessive time delays or other conditions that may warrant an
upgrade to Code 3.
CODE 3 DRIVER AND CO-DRIVER RESPONSIBILITIES
Fire Department emergency response vehicles shall have 2 PFD members in the front seats of the
vehicle whenever possible while responding Code 3. In addition to supervisory responsibilities,
Company Officers or ranking Officers in the front seats have Co-driver responsibilities.
1. The Driver is responsible for operating the vehicle safely and compliance with this policy.
2. The Co-driver is responsible for being a second set of eyes and ears anytime a unit is
responding Code 3.
3. Driver and Co-driver must be focused on intersection management any time a PFD vehicle
enters an intersection Code 3.
4. Intersection management requires the Drivers and Co-driver’s undivided attention.
5. The Co-driver and the Driver should be accounting for clearance in all traffic lanes including
pedestrian traffic.
6. Where a complete stop is required by policy, the Co-driver shall announce if it is clear or
not clear to proceed. The Driver makes the final decision of when it is clear to proceed.
Note: The Company Officer or ranking Officer is responsible for safety and policy compliance.
CODE 3 DRIVING POLICY
Fire Department Drivers and Co-drivers will comply with the following while operating vehicles
Code 3:
1. When responding Code 3, warning lights must be on and sirens must be sounded to warn
drivers of other vehicles, as required by the Arizona Motor Vehicle Code.
a. The use of sirens and warning lights does not automatically give the right-of-way to
the emergency vehicle. These devices simply request the right-of-way from other
drivers, based on their awareness of the emergency vehicle.
b. Emergency vehicle drivers must make every possible effort to make their presence
and intended actions known to other drivers and must drive defensively to be
prepared for the unexpected inappropriate actions of others.

DRIVER SAFETY
Page 3 of 5

2. Fire Department vehicles are authorized to exceed posted speed limits only when
responding Code 3 under favorable conditions. Under these conditions a maximum of 10
mph over the posted speed limit is authorized.
a. Recognizing there will be a brief deceleration period, when an emergency vehicle
must travel in center or oncoming traffic lanes, the maximum permissible speed
shall be 20 mph.
b. When an emergency vehicle must use center or oncoming traffic lanes to approachcontrolled intersections (traffic light or stop sign), the vehicle must come to a
complete stop before proceeding through the intersection, including occasions
when the vehicle has a green traffic light.
c. When an emergency vehicle approaches a negative right-of-way intersection (red
light or stop sign), the vehicle shall come to a complete stop and may proceed only
when the Driver can account for all oncoming traffic in all lanes yielding the rightof-way.
3. Code 3 response is authorized only in conjunction with emergency incidents. Unnecessary
emergency response shall be avoided. To avoid any unnecessary emergency response, on
multi-company responses, the first arriving unit (Incident Commander) will advise
additional units to respond Code 2 when appropriate.
4. During an emergency response, fire vehicles should avoid passing other emergency
vehicles. If passing is necessary, permission must be obtained through radio
communications, using the communications order model.
5. Water Tenders are not permitted to respond Code III.
ALS AND BLS EMERGENCY MEDICAL TRANSPORT
Response codes for Rescue units during patient transport will be established by the on-scene
Company Officer prior to the Rescue unit leaving the scene. If the on-scene Company Officer
determines that a Code 3 transport is required, the Company Officer should make every
reasonable effort to have a crewmember in the Co-driver position. Emergency medical transport
status shall be recorded via LV3 MCT code or via the tactical radio channel to the Alarm Room.
In the event a Rescue must change the response status from Code 2 to Code 3 while en route to a
medical facility, the members should make every effort to reassign available personnel to the Codriver position and rapid notification should be made to the Alarm Room.
During a transport, if at any time an attendant must remove their seatbelt to treat a critical patient,
the following must occur:
1. The attendant must determine the urgency of the needed treatment and the most
appropriate time during transport to accomplish the treatment.
2. The Driver will be notified of the needed treatment and will pull over when possible to allow
for the attendant to perform the treatment. Once the treatment is completed and the
attendant is seat-belted, the transport will continue.
DRIVER SAFETY
Page 4 of 5

3. If the transport needs to continue due to patient’s life-threatening condition or patient care
dictates, the attendant should advise the Driver that they are going to be unrestrained to
perform critical treatment. The critical treatment will be performed, and the attendant will
return to the belted position immediately.
4. The Driver and attendant should communicate about the condition of the patient and
changes in driving conditions. If appropriate, the Driver should communicate about
upcoming turns, braking or changes in traffic conditions.
DRIVER/OPERATOR, SUPERVISOR, & MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES
It is the responsibility of the Driver/Operator of each Fire Department vehicle/apparatus to comply
with the Arizona Motor Vehicle Code and this policy. When determining whether a violation of this
policy has occurred, the Fire Department will consider the fact that driving, and supervision of
policy compliance, are inherently divided attention tasks and that human factors can sometimes
cause minor deviations from policy requirements. An example of a minor deviation is
momentarily exceeding maximum allowable speed by 5 mph or less. Conversely, an example of
a major deviation is traveling through a controlled intersection without stopping when required
or exceeding allowable speed limits by 10 mph or more; in these instances, the violation must be
reported up the chain of command and will be managed through the disciplinary process.
The Company Officer or ranking Officer in the vehicle is ultimately responsible for policy
compliance. The Fire Department recognizes that all fire department vehicles do not have the same
tools to assist with monitoring policy compliance. For example, when vehicles do not have a
passenger speedometer, it could be difficult for a Company Officer to notice minor deviations of
speed. However, when the Company Officer or ranking Officer recognizes or should reasonably
recognize a violation of policy, they have a duty to act to stop the violation.

DRIVER SAFETY
Page 5 of 5

