PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

LADDER TENDER RESPONSE
M.P. 205.10

03/03-R

Page 1 of 1

Ladder Tenders
The objective of operating a ladder tender in conjunction with a ladder truck housed at a fire station is
to provide a full level of truck capabilities, while extending the service life of the larger, more costly
apparatus. Ladder tender (LT) vehicles are purchased at a fraction of the cost of full-sized truck
companies and are intended to be utilized wherever they are deemed adequate (i.e., E.M.S. calls,
special duties, extrications, etc.). Ladder tenders may provide Basic Life Support (LT) or with an
Advanced Life Support Team (LPT).
Response to Structural Alarms
When responding from quarters, a complete crew will respond on the Ladder Truck to all structural
assignments of 3-1 or greater magnitude. The company officer may choose to bring along the Ladder
Tender to increase the flexibility of the company at the scene (i.e. two-piece company).

If the crew is dispatched to a structural assignment while out of quarters in the Ladder Tender, the
company will respond to the incident in the Ladder Tender. Dispatch must be advised that response is
with a Ladder Tender. The TRO will then relay this information to all responding units. When
responding with a Ladder Tender, it will sometimes be necessary for Ladder Tender personnel to use
hand ladders or other equipment off engine companies at the scene. A pessimistic approach is
essential, and if any indicators suggest that the apparatus may not be adequate to handle the incident
(i.e., multi-story building, ladder pipe potential, etc.) a backup Ladder Truck should be requested.
Response to B.L.S. Dispatches
The officer in charge of a two-piece truck company may choose to respond to a B.L.S. dispatch with a
minimum four-member crew on the Ladder Tender.
In summary, a pessimistic approach is required when a question exists as to whether a ladder tender
response is adequate for an incident. A good rule to follow: when in doubt, request a Ladder company
backup.

