PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

RADIOLOGICAL DECONTAMINATION
M.P. 204.03A

04/98-R

Page 1 of 2

Personnel may be contaminated with alpha or beta radioactive emitting material at any radiological
incident. In order to prevent any health risk to personnel and to control the spread of the
contamination, the following steps should be taken:
•

All personnel (both fire and civilian) that were inside the Hot Zone must not be released
from the zone until they have been surveyed with radiation detection instruments and
decontaminated if necessary.

•

Contaminated personnel leaving the Hot Zone must pass through the Decontamination
Area. (See sketch)

•

All personnel reporting to the Decontamination Area will remain fully dressed in
protective gear, including gloves and SCBA (facepiece in place).

•

No smoking, drinking or food consumption will be permitted until all exposed personnel
are determined to be free from contamination.

•

All contaminated clothing and equipment must be removed and held in the
Decontamination Area.

Plastic bags or plastic trash containers must be utilized to contain contaminated clothing and
equipment. (City plastic trash containers are excellent for this purpose and may be confiscated from
any nearby residential area or obtained through the City Sanitation Department.)
Removal of Contaminated Equipment and Clothing
All radioactively contaminated equipment and clothing must be placed in plastic containers at one of
three collection points (see diagram).
1. At the first survey point all personnel will be checked in with monitoring instruments. If not
contaminated, personnel may leave the Warm Zone via Lobby Control.
2. Contaminated personnel will place coat, boots and bunker pants in the first container,
continuing to maintain SCBA facepiece in place. All items must be gently handled to avoid
spreading dust (radioactive particles) and using gloves at all times. Actions should avoid
contaminating inner clothing, skin and particularly hands. SCBA harness and cylinder must
be carried to second container.
3. After the second container, personnel will again be checked and, if free of contamination,
may be released from the Hot Zone. If still contaminated, personnel must proceed to the
third container.
4. At the third collection point, all outer clothing will be removed and personnel will be checked
again with monitoring instruments. If still contaminated, personnel must shower at the site,
using a portable shower and soap. Showering must pay particular attention to body areas
which may collect contaminants (armpits, hair, fingernails, etc.) and avoid runoff into eyes or
ears.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

RADIOLOGICAL DECONTAMINATION
M.P. 204.03A

04/98-R

Page 2 of 2

Following showers, personnel will again be surveyed for contamination, before being issued with clean
coveralls.
NOTE:

Shower runoff water must be impounded and collected. All personnel released from the Hot
Zone shall be directed to shower and shampoo and put on clean clothes as soon as
possible after the incident. Medical evaluation will be arranged for all exposed personnel as
quickly as feasible.

