PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

CLANDESTINE DRUG LABORATORIES
M.P. 204.07

06/97-R

Page 1 of 3

SCOPE
The number of clandestine drug laboratories has increased dramatically in recent years. The
number of seizures, "busts," or "raids," made by law enforcement agencies has also increased.
Clandestine drug laboratory investigations, seizures, and arrests of suspects are all police
department or law enforcement agency matters. However, local law enforcement agencies are
calling upon fire department hazardous incident response teams for assistance during raids and for
advice on safety matters.
POLICY
The Phoenix Fire Department will provide limited support for police departments and other
agencies, when requested, at sites of clandestine drug laboratories. Support may consist of, but
is not limited to: providing research and information on chemicals that are suspected or are
known to be in the laboratory, remote exterior air monitoring, and decontamination of police entry
personnel.
HAZARDS
Substitution of proper equipment with unsafe items is prevalent in low budget clandestine
laboratory operations. For example, pressure cookers have been substituted for three neck flasks
in the initial cooking stage of methamphetamine. Without ventilation, this type of operation can
easily generate toxic levels of phosphine gas.
Booby traps have been left in place and armed when a lab is abandoned. Opening or moving
doors, windows, refrigerator doors, chemical containers, or furniture may be a triggering
mechanism for an explosive device or chemical reaction that is lethal. Trip wires made from
monofilament fishing line may be strung across doorways, hallways, or across rooms to activate
different types of devices. It is imperative that nothing is moved, shut off, turned on, or touched,
at a laboratory, whether it is operational or abandoned. Electric switches, vacuum pumps,
glassware, chemical containers, or anything that is plugged into a wall outlet should not be
touched. Water sources, especially to reflux or condensing towers, should not be shut off.
Shutting off the water supply to a cooking process can result in an explosion.
INDICATORS
Personnel should be aware of the indications of potential clandestine drug laboratories when
responding to EMS, fire, check odor, or an other service request. Common indicators are:
•
•
•
•
•

Unusual odors like ether, acetic, solvents, and odors of urea.
Glassware that is normally associated with school or industrial laboratories, such as flasks,
beakers, flasks with vacuum ports, glass cooling towers, and funnels.
Heating elements, hot plates, or heating mantles.
Vacuum pumps, plastic or rubber tubing.
Marked and unmarked chemical containers of various sizes.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

CLANDESTINE DRUG LABORATORIES
M.P. 204.07

06/97-R

Page 2 of 3

SUSPECTED DRUG LABORATORY OPERATION - NOTIFICATION PROCESS
Personnel that encounter a suspected laboratory should withdraw to a safe location as soon as it
is possible, using discretion on actions and radio conversation. The on-duty Battalion Chief, the
Police Department, and the Special Operations duty person should be notified of the situation. If
a situation warrants additional immediate action (e.g. evacuation of surrounding areas, several
victims, a chemical release or spill), the Dispatch Center should be requested to send the
appropriate level of a hazardous materials assignment. Command should also request the
response of the Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) Emergency Response Division.
NOTIFICATION FOR USE OF H.I.R.T. UNITS
Any agency requesting the Hazardous Incident Response Team for assistance during seizure of a
clandestine drug laboratory shall contact the Duty Deputy or Car 94 for scheduling of the
Hazardous Incident Response Team. The agency that is requesting the assistance shall provide
information on location, time, staging area, and the type of assistance that is needed. A preincident meeting shall be scheduled between the agency and Car 94 to address the concerns
noted above. Security of information will be strictly adhered to.
The Duty Deputy, District Commander, and Battalion Chief of the affected district/battalion will be
notified at an appropriate time, but in all cases, at the time entry is made. Such notification will
be initiated by Car 94.
TACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
The recognition of the presence of a clandestine drug laboratory that is involved in a fire may not
occur until after fire control has been achieved. The initial indications of the presence of a
laboratory may be subtle or very apparent. Depending on the products involved, a fire in a lab
can spread faster and burn with more intensity that what might normally be expected. The color
of the flames may appear to be an unusually bright or dark orange, or the flames may be of
several different colors. An unusual color of smoke or odor may also be present.
A laboratory that is involved in a fire situation should be viewed pessimistically by Command.
Command should request the Dispatch Center to send balance of the appropriate level of a
hazardous materials assignment. A defensive mode may be appropriate for personnel safety.
Standard protective clothing and SCBA use may not afford complete protection. An acceptable
alternative is to protect any exposures and allow the fire to burn, providing the products of
combustion being generated are not complicating the problem further. Run-off may also create a
problem and diking may be necessary.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

CLANDESTINE DRUG LABORATORIES
M.P. 204.07

06/97-R

Page 3 of 3

HEALTH AND SAFETY
Personnel showing any signs or symptoms of a chemical exposure during or after any incident
involving a laboratory or a suspected laboratory should be treated and transported to Poison
Control, providing that the exposure is not a critical life threatening emergency. Critical life
threatening injuries require transport to the closest hospital. All potentially exposed personnel and
equipment must be decontaminated. All potentially exposed personnel should complete a
Hazardous Materials Exposure Report Form (91-38D). Exposed equipment, especially protective
clothing, may have to be properly disposed of. Notification of Health and Fitness Deputy,
Exposure Control Officer, and Safety Officer shall be made.
ENTRY
Phoenix Fire Department personnel will not participate in a law enforcement agency entry
operation into a suspected and unsecured clandestine drug laboratory. Security shall mean that
the Police Department Bomb Squad and S.A.U. teams have surveyed the area and all suspects are
in custody, and confirmation that the building has been searched and no explosive devices were
found. Phoenix Fire Department personnel may make an entry into a secured drug laboratory if an
emergency situation involving hazardous materials develops and if the safety of Phoenix Fire
Department personnel is not jeopardized.
Prior to taking any action at a suspected clandestine drug laboratory, the Phoenix Fire Department
will request the response of a representative of the Department of Environmental Quality
Emergency Response Division. If a representative from the Department of Environmental Quality
is unable to respond directly to the location of the incident, every effort will be made to contact a
representative by telephone to inform them of the situation. This shall be accomplished by the
Special Operations duty person.
ADDITIONAL FIRE DEPARTMENT RESOURCE
Additional resource requirements needed at the site will be determined by the Special Operations
Duty Officer or Battalion Chief. A multi-company response will cause the activation of the
incident command system.
DISPOSAL
Proper disposal of the hazardous material(s) in a clandestine laboratory is the responsibility of the
law enforcement agency that is making the seizure. The law enforcement agency on-scene must
arrange clean-up with the proper contractor.

