PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

ON-SITE FLASHOVER CHAMBER FIRES
M.P. 202.14B

08/96-N

Page 1 of 5

PURPOSE
The purpose of this procedure is to establish standard guidelines for conducting on-site training fires in
the Emergency Services Institute (ESI) flashover chamber, while complying with NFPA Standard 1403.
All other Phoenix Fire procedures will apply to training fires where applicable.
GENERAL USAGE
Any Fire Department member or outside agency wishing to use the flashover chamber must first obtain
permission from an ESI chief officer.
The time and date of the training drill must be scheduled with the ESI staff. Drills involving Recruit
Training and Departmental Training always have first priority.
An officer representing the ESI staff must be on-site for any live fire drills involving the
flashover chamber. A fee may be charged to outside services/agencies.
The flashover chamber has been designed specifically for the purpose of repeated live fire training
evolution's and include safeguards that only become unacceptably hazardous through misuse and
neglect.
COMMAND
One officer on the scene shall be designated as "Command" and will assume the Command functions.
A Command Post shall be established and positioned to afford maximum visibility of the structure,
operating companies and fire conditions.
COMMUNICATIONS
Command is responsible for establishing radio communications with each company officer or training
officer involved in the drill. Channel assignment must be coordinated with Dispatch and Deployment
and all companies involved. Companies operating at the training fire will continuously monitor the
assigned radio channel. All radios will be checked for proper functioning and correct channel prior to
initiating training fire operations.
SECTORS
To eliminate confusion, and provide adequate scene control, all personnel operating within the
fireground perimeter shall operate under the direction of a sector officer. The fireground perimeter shall
be defined as the hazardous area surrounding the burn structure and shall be determined by Command
following guidelines stated in Fireground Safety.
The following sectors shall be established on all flashover chamber fires.
Interior - Training officer directing interior activities.
Rescue (RIC)

Provide a staffed, charged back-up line for each fire attack team, in position to
assist in fire extinguishment and rescue of interior personnel. This sector will be staffed
by experienced fire fighting personnel (not recruit fire fighters) and each Rapid
Intervention Crew (RIC) shall consist of a minimum of three fire fighters. A company

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

ON-SITE FLASHOVER CHAMBER FIRES
M.P. 202.14B

08/96-N

Page 2 of 5

officer shall be in charge of each RIC unit. There shall be one rescue team for each fire
attack team.
Safety -

The safety officer or a safety representative will be in attendance at all flashover
chamber training fires and will assume safety sector responsibilities. The safety sector
will monitor personnel and fire conditions, and work with Command to ensure all safety
procedures are complied with, and that risk to personnel is minimized.

Other
Sectors -

Other sectors may be established as necessary to control training/fire control
operations and to minimize risk to fire fighters.

SAFETY
The safety officer shall have full authority to intervene and control or stop any aspect of the operations
when in his/her judgment, a potential or real risk to personnel exists. He/she will not be assigned other
duties that would distract from his/her safety responsibilities.
Safety officer shall conduct a protective clothing inspection for each member prior to entering the
chamber.
Additional safety officers may be assigned to the training fire if the conditions dictate. Responsibilities
of the safety officer(s) will include but not be limited to the prevention of unsafe acts and elimination of
unsafe conditions.
Company officers acting as instructors will be responsible for the direct supervision of assigned
students and their safety and welfare, including the prevention of unsafe acts and the elimination of
unsafe conditions.
The number of personnel involved in training fires inside the flashover chamber shall be limited to ten
(10) personnel. To reduce risk, and assist with scene management, training fire participants shall be
formed into individual teams consisting of no more than eight (8) members and supervised by two (2)
qualified flashover chamber instructors.
Exposing recruit fire fighters to live fire conditions presents special safety considerations.
All fire fighters involved in flashover chamber training fires shall have received training to meet the
performance objectives of:
• Protective Breathing Apparatus
• Fire Hose, Nozzles and Appliances
• Fire Streams
• Ventilation
• Rescue
• Safety
• Fire Behavior
One officer on the scene shall be designated as an accountability officer and will assume the
accountability functions.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

ON-SITE FLASHOVER CHAMBER FIRES
M.P. 202.14B

08/96-N

Page 3 of 5

To enhance accountability and to improve tracking of fire fighters in the Hot Zone, the "PASSPORT"
system shall be used,
Personnel Accountability Report or "PAR" shall be used at the following accountability benchmarks:
•
•
•
•
•

Upon entry
Any report of fire fighter in distress
Upon exiting the structure
Sudden hazardous event
At the discretion of command

Passports will remain with the designated Accountability Officer near the "point of entry" to the
flashover chamber. Upon entry, crews will turn in their PASSPORT. Upon exit, the crew must retrieve
their PASSPORT. The accountability status board will contain only the PASSPORTS of those teams in
the flashover chamber.
No personnel shall be permitted to act as a victim(s) during training fires.
To reinforce safety procedures, a protective clothing and equipment inspection shall be conducted on
all fire fighters before and after the flashover training. The inspection shall insure that all clothing and
equipment is serviceable and worn in a manner to provide the maximum personal protection.
REQUIRED FIRE EQUIPMENT AND COMPANIES
Two separate sources of water supply shall be established (one Engine and one Tender minimum).
The water supply shall be test flowed by the forward pumper to insure adequate water supply of a
minimum of 500 gallons per minute.
All fire suppression hoselines shall be supplied by one pumper. The RIC unit backup hoselines shall
be supplied by a Tender. All hoselines will be flow tested to confirm a minimum of 95 gpm, prior to
igniting the fire.
All members shall have a full SCBA bottle prior to entering the flashover chamber. ALS capabilities
shall be maintained on-scene during training fires.
FLASHOVER CHAMBER PREPARATION
All doors, and smoke vents necessary for the training drill shall be checked and operated prior to any
live fire conditions to ensure correct operation.
The flashover chamber shall be left in a safe condition upon completion of live fire training. Debris
hindering the access or egress of fire fighters shall be removed before continuing further operations.
After each flashover exercise, all fire debris shall be removed with care and completely extinguished.
Obtain approval from Air Quality Control.
Obtain approval from immediate supervisor.
Obtain approval of the safety officer.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

ON-SITE FLASHOVER CHAMBER FIRES
M.P. 202.14B

08/96-N

Page 4 of 5

STARTING THE FIRE
The use of flammable or combustible liquids as defined in NFPA 30, shall be prohibited for use in live
fire training evolutions. Only Class A materials shall be used in live fire training. A charged and
manned hose line shall be in position to provide additional protection. The instructor will load the
container with boards of fibrous material. He will make sure the wall and ceiling boards are placed as
close together as possible and ensure the ceiling boards are pressed against the ceiling to prevent
combustible gas pockets. A considerable amount of combustible gas is lost if there is a fire between
the boards and the ceiling. (The combustible gas is what produces and demonstrates the flashover).
The initial fire shall be of dry fibrous material and shall be placed in one corner of the fire room. Make
sure the roof hatch is working and that the door and the side hatch are easy to open. The ignition
process will be conducted under the direct supervision of the safety officer.
Command shall assign an experienced fire fighter to become "FIRESTARTER". It is the responsibility
of the FIRESTARTER to initially ignite the fire. FIRESTARTER shall also regulate the fuel load for each
evolution to maintain a tenable atmosphere inside the flashover chamber.
The ignition of the fire shall be coordinated through Command so the flashover chamber does not
become overheated before observation teams make entry.
PRE-PLANNING
A pre-fire tour of the flashover chamber is required.
PRE-ENTRY BRIEFING
The Instructor in charge shall develop a briefing to include these important points:
-

History and Development of Flashover Chamber
Purpose of exercise
Observe character of the combustible gases
Observe neutral zone
Observe air supply
Observe differences of pressure
Observe extinguishing effect

All personnel involved in the drill shall be instructed on each element of the plan prior to igniting the
initial fire and shall receive a walk through briefing of the chamber prior to each training fire. An
evacuation plan and signal shall be reviewed and agreed upon.
NOTIFICATION OF TRAINING FIRE ACTIVITIES
Prior to conducting flashover chamber training fires, the following notifications must be made.
-

Dispatch & Deployment
On-duty Public Information Officer (PIO)
Safety Officer
Air Quality Control
Solid Waste Management to the (east)

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

ON-SITE FLASHOVER CHAMBER FIRES
M.P. 202.14B

08/96-N

Page 5 of 5

ON-SITE BURN OPERATIONS CHECKLIST
-

-

Adequate fire apparatus on site
ALS capabilities on-scene
Pumper and Tender flow tested for 500 gpm water supply
Fire load; conservative; not excessive
Ignition location determined
Safe ignition fuel utilized
FIRESTARTER in full protective clothing/SCBA
Protection line in place for FIRESTARTER; manned and charged
Training Chief Officer on-scene
Safety officer (or representative) on-scene
Command and sectors established
Command location identified and announced
All radios checked for proper functioning/channel
Sectors established
Interior
Rescue (RIC)
Safety
Other
Accountability Officer established
Suppression line in place, flow tested for a minimum of 95 gpm each
RIC lines in place, flow tested for a minimum of 95 gpm each
RIC manned by minimum of three fire fighters
One RIC unit in place (with hoseline) for each observation team
Suppression lines from one pumper, RIC lines from a separate pumper or tender
Flashover chamber participants and RIC units in full protective clothing, PASS and
SCBA checked for proper functioning
Flashover chamber instructors in charge of each observation team and RIC unit
Operating plan established and understood by all
Walk through briefing conducted for all crews
Rescue plan established and understood by all
PASSPORTS and status boards near point of entry
Protective clothing and SCBA’s shall be decontaminated

