Policy Name:

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES
Policy Number:
SALVAGE
M.P. 202.12A

This policy is for internal use only and is not intended, nor should it be construed to expand
the legal duty under the law or expand civil liability in any way. This policy does not create a
higher duty of care under the law to act. Remedies for violations of this policy, if proven, are
limited to administrative disciplinary action against PFD employees.
Related Policies: 202.01, 202.04, 202.05, 202.05B, 206.02
Other Reference:
Date Implemented: 08/2022-R
Review Date: 08/2028

PURPOSE
This procedure describes guidelines for conducting salvage operations. Virtually every fire, small
or large, produces a need for some form of salvage operations. Salvage includes activities
required to stop direct and indirect fire damage as well as those actions to reasonably mitigate
the effects of firefighting operations. This includes losses from water, smoke, and other firefighting
efforts. Salvage operations should be aimed at controlling loss by reasonable expedient means.
Salvage objectives are:
• To reasonably stop or reduce the sources of damage
• To reasonably protect or remove contents
Command will provide for salvage at all fires or other incidents posing potential damage to
property.
Salvage operations most often involve early smoke removal and covering building contents with
salvage covers or plastic. In some cases, the contents of all threatened areas can be removed to a
safe location. When removal is not practical, contents should be grouped in the center of rooms,
raised off of the floor and covered to provide maximum practical protection.
The following items should be considered when addressing salvage:
• Type, value and location of contents
• The extent and location of the fire
• Recognition of existing and potential damage sources
• Estimate of required resource

SALVAGE
Page 1 of 2

EXTENT AND LOCATION OF FIRE
Salvage efforts should begin in areas most severely threatened by damage. In most cases that will
be areas directly adjacent to or below the fire area. Additional salvage activities can expand
outward until all areas of potential loss are secured.
RECOGNITION OF EXISTING AND POTENTIAL DAMAGE SOURCES
All firefighting activities have the potential to damage property and contents. The key to successful
salvage is to distinguish between excessive damage, and damage that is required to reduce
potential fire damage. Reasonable loss control activities should be balanced to reduce the
potential damage incurred during firefighting activities.
TYPE, VALUE AND LOCATION OF CONTENTS
Replacement price and value should be the primary considerations when performing salvage
operations. It is often difficult to separate value from price. Salvage crews should consider both
the worth (value) of items and dollar cost. For example, business records, may have extremely
high value to business owners while their actual price represents only the paper they are printed
on. Pictures, wall paintings, family mementos, etc., may have very high personal value to the
property owner.
ESTIMATE OF REQUIRED RESOURCE
An early request for manpower and salvage equipment can significantly reduce loss. The first
company assigned to salvage should consider the size-up factors and request sufficient resources
to stabilize the situation.
SALVAGE EQUIPMENT
Common salvage equipment includes salvage covers and boxes, rolled plastic, hall runners,
brooms and squeegees.
CUSTOMER SERVICE
Command and/or the Sector Officer should meet with the property owner or responsible party
when available to determine/identify the salvage priorities. The earlier this can be done, the
greater the opportunity to identify high value/priority items or areas. In some cases, when safe to
do so, allowing the property owner/occupant to be escorted through the building by Fire
Department personnel can be of great assistance to the loss control operation.

SALVAGE
Page 2 of 2

