PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Resource Sector
M.P. 202.07

11/14-R

12/19-SR

The Resource Sector is established as a supply pool to provide a standby supply of equipment for operating
sectors. The Resource Sector provides an identifiable location at which available supplies are assembled to
provide immediate support when required. Resource Sector is also responsible for having the immediate area
checked for equipment which may have been left at the scene upon termination of the incident.
POLICY
Command is responsible for identifying the need for establishment of a Resource Sector and assigning its
implementation. This requires the assignment of a Resource Sector Officer and sufficient personnel to operate
the Resource Sector as outlined below.
OPERATIONAL INFORMATION
The Resource Sector should be established in close proximity to the scene of operations, but outside of the
defined fireground/medical incident perimeter in a safe location.
For high-rise operations, the Resource Sector is normally established five floors below the on-deck floor or any
other safe, uncontaminated environment below the fire. Command may identify the location of the Resource
Sector or direct the assigned Resource Sector Officer to find and announce an appropriate location. The
Resource Sector Officer should locate an area large enough to meet the foreseeable needs of Resource Sector,
which may be much larger than initial needs would dictate (this will avoid congestion and the need to relocate).
The Resource Sector exists to provide support to operating sectors. This requires anticipation of equipment
and/or personnel which will be needed.
The Resource Sector Officer should attempt to identify the types of equipment and supplies which will be
required for the situation and provide delivery to the Resource Sector. This often involves moving tools and
equipment from apparatus in Staging to the Resource Sector. Typical supplies involved include spare air bottles,
hose, nozzles, hand tools, blowers, lights and loss control equipment. For major medical incidents; backboards,
c-collars, oxygen, and associated equipment should be assembled.
The Resource Sector will maintain an inventory of equipment and supplies at all times. The Resource Sector
Officer will assign sufficient personnel to provide for adequate support within the sector, including necessary
movement of equipment. Equipment areas in the resource pool should be grouped by type, denoting
equipment that is ready for use and equipment that is depleted.
In high-rise fires, the radio designation "Resource" should include the floor number that Resource is located on
(e.g., "Resource 25"). This will assist firefighting forces in locating Resource Sector within the building.
Communications will involve interaction with Command and Staging to provide supplies to the Resource Sector
(in a high-rise incident, Lobby Sector will also be involved). Operating sectors may obtain equipment by direct
communication with "Resource.”
Page 1 of 1

