PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

ADAPTIVE RESPONSE UNITS
M.P. 205.09

09/09-R

Page 1 of 1

The Adaptive Response Engine Company Program provides additional engine companies in the
dispatch system. These companies should be considered for use as substitutes for companies which
are out of service for extended periods of time due to training, maintenance, emergency incidents or
other approved company activities. The purpose of this procedure is to provide move-up guidelines for
adaptive response companies.
Move-Up Responsibility
The AHQ Chief (BC), along with the Alarm Room Supervisor and Lead Dispatchers are responsible for
management of adaptive response move-ups. Together, they review the company activity calendar
each morning. Special events, scheduled and unscheduled out-of-service activity and requests from
field BC’s and company officers must be considered.
Company officers are responsible for prompt and efficient relocation to areas when assigned by alarm.
Outlying areas which normally have increased response times (due to sparser coverage) shall be
covered whenever possible.
Move-Up Criteria
Adaptive Response Company move-ups will be made for both scheduled and emergency activity that
places engine companies out of service for extended periods of time. Move-ups should be considered
for the following situations:
1. All working incidents that will keep a number of companies out-of-service for extended periods.
2. All working incidents that have high degree of likelihood of escalating to greater alarms.
3. Extended scheduled company activity which depletes coverage in outlying areas.
Move-Up Notification
Move-ups should be made as soon as Dispatch has knowledge that coverage will be necessary.
Companies identified for scheduled move-up assignments should be notified in advance if possible to
allow company officers and crews to plan accordingly. Unscheduled move-up notification will be made
through the normal CAD entry move-up and Channel 1 notification, unless it is convenient to notify
crews via landline. The direct ring down "99" telephone notification may also be used for move-ups.
When a move-up requires a company to leave their city (ie: Glendale), the appropriate Shift
Commander should be notified.
Responding to Assigned Move-up location
Company officers of Adaptive Response Companies will immediately collect their crewmembers and
respond to the move-up location. Move-ups will normally be under a non-emergency Code 2 status.
Dispatch, however, may order a Code 3 response under critical emergency conditions. Companies
should respond to their move-up assignment in an “out of service” status, while monitoring Channel
One and may respond to nearby calls at the discretion of the Company Officer.
Returning to First Due Areas
Companies which have had their areas covered by adaptive response units should return to their first
due area and go in service promptly when their activity has concluded. Adaptive Response Units shall
stay in their move-up location (in service) until assigned by alarm to return to their first due or another
location. Adaptive Response Units should monitor Channel One while returning to their own first due in
an “out of service” status and respond to calls in their proximity at the discretion of the company officer.

