Page |1

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

3 DEEP DEPLOYMENT MODEL & ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
M.P. 201.06

05/21

Page 1 of 3

POLICY
The decisions required to provide for adequate resources are an important factor in
effective emergency incident management. The Incident Commander (IC) must balance
the tactical problems with the resources required to control those problems and stay
ahead of the situation through effective forecasting. Beware of "Crisis Management."
Crisis management is often a situation that grows at a rate faster than the response rate
to that situation. Often times the IC ends up with an out of control situation and
inadequate resources to control it. Many times, the IC will reach a point where they begin
to debate whether to call another alarm or not, in such cases call for it. If the extra
resources are not needed, they can easily be put back in service.
3 DEEP DEPLOYMENT MODEL
Command must provide for a tactical reserve of fire companies. Command must deploy
resources in support of their incident action plan. Command must have enough
resources to provide for a tactical reserve of fire companies deployed in appropriate
forward positions. This is to manage the strategic and tactical needs of the incident or
sector and provide a reserve of resources to address a firefighter rescue should one
arise. Command should expand the incident organization through sectorization and
should utilize a 3-deep deployment model for resources within those sectors. The 3-deep
deployment model for managing resources is as follows:
• Working
• On-Deck
• Recycle/Staged
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
In most cases, Command should utilize the greater alarm mechanism, it is the quickest,
provides for automatic move-ups and provides the support necessary for the additional
resources/expanding incident. Command should resist the temptation to request
assistance in a piecemeal fashion. Additional alarms should be struck sequentially which
includes going from a 3 & 1 assignment, to a 1st alarm, to a 2nd alarm, etc. It is the
continuing responsibility and function of Command to determine the resources required
to control the situation and to provide for the timely call for any additional resources
required.
The early call for additional resources will tend to consistently save the day. Command
must be aware of both the capability and response time of additional resources and
effectively integrate these factors in their decision to call more resources. Some tactical

Page |2

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

3 DEEP DEPLOYMENT MODEL & ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
M.P. 201.06

05/21

Page 2 of 3

situations move slowly, while some move very quickly. Command must call for
additional resources at a rate that stays ahead of the incident. Some situations require
the categorical call for additional alarms or upgrading an assignment upon knowledge of
particular characteristics or conditions. In other situations, Command will initiate some
fire control activities, ask for reports and, based upon receipt of bad news, will strike
more alarms.
When calling for additional resources, Command must expand the incident organization
to manage those additional resources. Command cannot encounter a big fire situation,
call additional alarms and then expect to effectively manage those additional resources
without expanding the incident organization through sectorization.
The following provides some examples of situations that will necessitate additional
resources:
• An actual or potential fire situation exists, and the life hazard exceeds the rescue
EMS capabilities of initial alarm companies.
• The number, location and condition of actual victims exceeds the
rescue/removal/treatment capabilities of companies.
• An actual or potential fire situation exists, and the property protection demand
exceeds the fire control capabilities of initial alarm companies.
• Fire conditions become more severe or the situation deteriorates significantly.
• All companies have been committed and the fire is not controlled.
• Command forecasts that forces could be depleted due to exhaustion; command
must forecast the effect the fire will have on personnel and provide for the support
of such personnel in advance.
• Command anticipates running out of some resource (firefighters, apparatus,
water, equipment, command officers, etc.).
• There is evidence of significant fire, but companies are unable to determine
location and extent.
• The commitment of companies is not effective.
• Companies cannot effectively perform early loss control operations.
• Situation becomes so widespread/complex that Command can no longer
effectively manage; the situation requires a larger command organization and
more sector functions.
• The weather is or has the potential to have a particularly exhausting effect on
resources.

Page |3

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

3 DEEP DEPLOYMENT MODEL & ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
M.P. 201.06

•

05/21

Page 3 of 3

Command instinctively feels the need to summon additional resources (don't
disregard fireground hunches).

