Policy Name:

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES
Policy Number:
RESCUE
M.P. 202.02C

This policy is for internal use only and does not expand an employee’s legal duty or civil
liability in any way. This policy should not be construed as creating a duty to act or a higher
duty of care, with respect to third party civil claims against employees or the Phoenix Fire
Department (PFD). Remedies for violations of this policy, if proven, are limited to
administrative disciplinary action against PFD employees.
Related Policies: 201.01, 201.01C, 201.06, 202.04, 202.05, 202.12E
Other Reference: UL Fire Safety Research Institute
Date Implemented: 03/2022-R
Review Date: 03/2026

Life safety is the highest tactical priority on the fireground and in all other hazard zones. The
primary focus of hazard zone operations is to size up an incident to assess for the presence or
likelihood of savable lives and build a plan to execute the rescue of victims. There are many
potential actions that can best facilitate the successful rescue and/or removal of victims and are
dependent on conditions and resources.
The two elements that are of greatest threat to fire victims are toxic and thermal exposure. Toxic
exposure to the products of combustion is less about the proximity to the fire and directly
impacted by the volume and movement of the smoke and gases in the interior of the structure.
The degree of which victim(s) are exposed to toxic smoke is directly related to their elevation and
location in the building. Since heat and smoke rises and travels throughout the building, victims
in elevated locations are at a higher risk. Exceptions exist, like for instance a closed interior door
that protects the victims from the smoke and heat.
Thermal exposure is directly related to the proximity to the fire and the elevation a victim is in the
interior. Victims located near to or in the flow path inside the structure are at significantly more
risk as well. The closer a victim is and the higher they are in the interior space, the greater the total
exposure and danger. Barriers, such as closed doors and furniture, can provide some protection
from thermal exposure to trapped victims inside of a structure.
We initiate every fire response with the expectation that we will encounter fire and smoke
conditions that are endangering the occupants. An effective size up, utilizing all forms of
information gathering available, is critical. Exterior fire and smoke conditions can give clues to the
most endangered spaces but is not always reliable as to the extent and threat level to the victims.
A size-up from the interior is necessary to assess the immediate conditions potentially impacting
victims and may be very different from the exterior perspective. It is critical to assess the most
RESCUE
Page 1 of 5

effective action on the fireground to improve the tenability of victims prior to rescue. Sometimes
this action involves an effective fire attack from the most advantageous position (interior or
exterior) to improve the conditions. Other times it may involve immediately working to remove
victims utilizing the path of safest removal. Removing the victims from the fire or removing the
fire/heat/smoke from the victims is a critical decision at all active fire incidents where savable lives
exist.
PROCEDURE
The Incident Commander (IC) shall direct fireground efforts to protect savable lives. For example,
on residential fires, the IC shall direct a primary search in all involved and exposed occupancies
when aligned with the risk management profile. When appropriate at non-residential fires, the IC
should take steps to facilitate and support evacuation of the fire occupancy as well as exposures.
The IC should determine the most effective action utilizing the limited initial resources to best
impact victim rescue. The initial action may be an exterior or interior fire attack coupled with
immediate rescue actions. The Incident Commander must structure initial operations around the
completion of the primary search.
The Incident Commander must consider the following factors in developing a basic rescue sizeup:
• Number, location, and condition of victims.
• Fire conditions and the impact it has on the victims.
• What actions best impact the survivability and/or tenability of the victims?
• What actions best impact our ability to search the structure?
• Can firefighters access the victims?
• How are they going to be removed from the structure?
Note: The IC should ensure a 360 is completed on all incidents to assess the factors above.
Command must make the basic rescue decision:
• Do we remove the victims from the fire? OR
• Do we remove the fire from the victims?
• Do the conditions and resources allow for simultaneous action?
Rescue efforts should be extended in the following order:
• Most severely threatened
• The largest number (groups)
• The remainder of the fire area
• The exposed areas

RESCUE
Page 2 of 5

A primary search means companies have quickly gone through all affected areas and verified the
removal and/or safety of all occupants. Time is the critical factor in the primary search process.
Successful primary search operations must be extended as quickly as possible dependent on the
conditions and fire suppression actions. The completion of the primary search is reported utilizing
the standard radio reporting term "All Clear."
It is the responsibility of Command to coordinate primary search assignments and secure
completion reports from interior companies. The tactical benchmark for completing a primary
search is “All Clear.” Alarm will record the time of the “All Clear” report from Command.
The rescue functions that follow fire control activities or completed after a primary search is
completed will be regarded as a secondary search. A secondary search means that companies
thoroughly search the interior of the fire area after initial fire control and ventilation activities have
been completed. A secondary search should preferably be completed by different companies than
those involved in the primary search activities. Thoroughness, rather than time, is the critical factor
in a secondary search.
The objective of a secondary search is the confirmation of an “All Clear.” This should be reported
to the Alarm Room upon completion.
OPERATIONAL INFORMATION
The stage of the fire becomes a critical factor that affects the rescue plan developed by Command.
On residential fire incidents, the following items outline the basic Command approach to fire
stages:
•

•

•

In nothing showing situations, or in very minor fire cases that clearly pose no life hazard,
Command must structure a rapid interior search and report "ALL CLEAR." The interior
search for victims will also include an interior size up for smoke or fire conditions.
In smoke showing and working fire situations, fire control efforts must be extended
simultaneously with rescue operations to gain entry and control interior access to complete
a primary search. In such cases, Command and operating companies must be aware that
this action is working with greatest allowable risk and is focused on the location and
removal of victims. Fire knockdown or control may be a critical factor in completing a
primary search. In working fire situations, a primary search must be followed by a
secondary search.
In cases of fully involved buildings or compartments of buildings, a fire attack with
adequate water flow becomes the primary focus. A size up must be conducted to determine
the ability to search exposed or connected areas if the conditions and building integrity
allow. This must be coordinated with the fire attack plan. Clear communications and
determination of what areas can be searched in conjunction with fire control and
coordinated ventilation is critical. Command must determine which areas will not be
RESCUE
Page 3 of 5

searched due to fire conditions and structural integrity. As quickly as fire control is
achieved, Command must structure what is, in effect, a secondary search for victims.
Command and operating companies cannot depend solely upon reports from residents and
spectators to determine status of victims. Fire companies should utilize reports as to the location,
number, and condition of victims as supporting primary search efforts, and must extend and
complete a primary search wherever entry is possible. Search and rescue operations are condition
and structure dependent.
In some cases, protecting exposed occupants in a safe location inside the structure is the most
appropriate action. These occupants are safer in their rooms than moving through contaminated
hallways and interior areas. Such movement may also impede interior firefighting. When these
actions are appropriate, this must be communicated to the Sector Officer or Command depending
on the size and complexity of the incident.
Command must make specific primary search assignments to companies to cover specific areas
of large or complex residential occupancies (e.g., high-rise, mid-rise, large care homes, etc.) and
maintain on-going control of such companies until the entire area is searched when conditions
allow. When primary search companies encounter and remove victims, Command must assign
other companies to continue to cover the interior positions vacated by those companies.
All initial attack efforts must be directed toward supporting rescue efforts and hose lines must be
placed in a manner to control interior access, confine the fire, and protect avenues of escape.
Hoseline placement and adequate water flows become critical factors in these cases. Command,
Sector Officers, and all operating companies must realize that the operation is still focused on the
rescue of occupants in coordination with an effective fire attack.
Normal means of interior access (e.g., stairs, halls, interior public areas, etc.) should be utilized to
remove victims whenever possible. Secondary means of rescue (e.g., aerial platforms and ladders,
ground ladders, fire escapes, helicopters, etc.) must be utilized in their order of effectiveness.
Command must realistically evaluate the resources required to remove victims and then treat their
fire-affected bodies. In cases involving such multiple victims, Command must call for the timely
response of adequate resources and quickly develop an organization that will both stabilize the
fire and provide for the removal and treatment of the occupants. Command must structure
treatment of victims after removal. Multiple victims should be removed to one location for more
effective triage and treatment. Command should coordinate treatment and assign treatment
companies as required to a Treatment Sector.
Once the primary search has been completed and an "ALL CLEAR" transmitted, Command must
maintain control of access to the fire area; beware of occupants (and others) re-entering the
RESCUE
Page 4 of 5

building. The most urgent reason for calling additional alarms is for the purpose of effectively
managing the life safety potential. Command must develop a realistic (and pessimistic) rescue
size-up as early as possible.
The term "SEARCH & RESCUE" should be used when assigning companies to a primary search
over the radio; "ALL CLEAR" should be used only as a completion report.

RESCUE
Page 5 of 5

