PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

LOSS CONTROL
M.P. 202.12

04/95-R

Page 1 of 5

PURPOSE
The purpose of this procedure is to describe the process to reduce, and in many cases eliminate,
certain losses experienced during and following fires and other types of incidents.
INTRODUCTION
There is "value added" to the quality of service when firefighting includes loss control functions. Loss
control involves methods of minimizing loss in each of the tactical priorities through all phases of
firefighting. Throughout each of the three (3) tactical priorities, the safety and survival of firefighters,
customer service, and loss control functions are continuously addressed.
Search & Rescue = All clear
Fire Control = Fire under control
Property Conservation = Loss stopped
This procedure will discuss the elements of loss control and how they are integrated at emergency
incidents.
LOSS CONTROL
The loss experienced by the owners/occupants of a structure as a result of a fire is devastating.
Primary and secondary loss can be minimized through active loss control efforts. There are many
opportunities for effective loss control during property conservation, but the other two tactical priorities
(rescue and fire control) present significant loss control opportunities.
In addition to the psychological and emotional injuries our customers may suffer, the building suffers
the effects of fire including charring, water, smoke, structural, and content damage. The structure
becomes weakened by the fire. The building is unsecured and open to the elements of nature, as well
as open to looting. The ceiling and walls throughout the house are damaged by smoke. Furniture
receives water and smoke damage. Appliances (refrigerator) and swimming pools are without the
electricity they need to preserve food and clean the pool. Through effective loss control efforts we can
intervene in all aspects of the incident and take specific measures to minimize loss.
An important element of loss control is to extinguish the fire. Fighting the fire from the unburned portion
will effect loss control. This needs to be regularly reinforced with members. Fire attacks from the
burning portion will usually push heat and smoke through the building and increase loss.
Performing skills like forcible entry and ventilation should be done with loss control in mind.
Loss control may operate as a sector or a branch. When assigned as a branch, loss control may
include several sectors.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

LOSS CONTROL
M.P. 202.12

04/95-R

Page 2 of 5

WATER DAMAGE
The most significant thing we can do to reduce damage is to put the fire out. As the fire travels so does
the damage. An aggressive interior attack may be the best step towards enhancing loss control efforts.
Yet knowing that water will do significant damage to dry wall, furniture, and carpeting, means we have
to control how much water is used. If possible, adjust the nozzle to allow for appropriate gallonage as
required in attack lines. Do not wet down the attic unnecessarily -- put the water directly on the fire and
burning embers. The use of class A foam in firefighting is another method of reducing water damage.
Water acts as a corrosive to pressed gypsum board (dry wall). It breaks the bond used in making the
board. Most of the houses and commercial structures we encounter will have gypsum board on the
walls and ceilings. When water is left to sit on gypsum board it will seep in and ruin the board.
Company officers and firefighters should be aware of the damage to drywall by direct water spray and
over spray. Reduce and eliminate over spray and it will minimize loss and water build up on the

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

LOSS CONTROL
M.P. 202.12

04/95-R

Page 3 of 5

furniture. Standing water on wooden counter tops is also very damaging because it can cause
delamination, staining, and cracking. For loss control purposes, wipe off counter tops and table tops
with a dry towel not allowing water to sit and penetrate the surface. Furniture sitting in puddles of water
will be damaged. Water will migrate up the wooden legs of furniture or over stuffed material and cause
it to soak, crack, and stain. Place blocks under legs of the furniture to raise it up and out of the water.
If no blocks are available, canned goods from the home serve the same purpose and are an option.
Cover exposed furniture and other materials with salvage covers or plastic.
When water has filled the attic space and is pooling on the gypsum use a drill or a screwdriver as a
hole punch to allow the water to escape. Water sitting on the gypsum board will eventually seep
through; by drilling a small hole we can possibly save the ceiling and the hole is easily patched.
CARPETING/FLOOR COVERINGS
Water on carpeting in itself is damaging. It is made worse by soot and broken glass being ground in
when stepping on the carpet. Hall runners should be used to avoid staining and grinding in soot.
When a window is broken to make entry the glass on the carpet may cause the need for replacement,
especially if the glass is ground in. When possible throw a carry-all over the glass under the window to
prevent the grinding by foot steps. If debris is covering a relatively good carpet or flooring, it should be
shoveled out and swept off.
SMOKE DAMAGE
Unless interrupted, the hot smoke produced by fire will move throughout the structure. Positive
pressure ventilation (PPV) to clear the smoke is performed during active fire stages. After fire control,
closing or opening doors in the structure will help reduce smoke damage during ongoing ventilation
efforts.
Cutting a hole in the roof is also favorable. Rapid removal of smoke improves firefighters ability to
conduct search and rescue operations as well as effective fire control and salvage operations. Once
the fire is extinguished and the embers cooled it is necessary to exhaust smoke. Avoid blowing it
throughout the structure and continue to ventilate during overhaul. Take smoldering materials such as
a couch outside for overhaul.
When appropriate, turn off the ventilation system in the building. The AC system will expose the
remainder of the structure and might contaminate the air handling system (which could require its
replacement).
DRYWALL
Work to protect the structure. If possible, when checking for extension by pulling ceiling, do not pull
drywall from corners -- it may require that both walls and ceiling be replaced and cause additional loss.
Cut small inspection holes, preferably 6" x 6," to check attics. Remember that to relieve excess water
in the attic space and to reduce loss, drill drainage holes into the ceiling.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

LOSS CONTROL
M.P. 202.12

04/95-R

Page 4 of 5

BUILDING PACKAGING
Just as we package a patient for transport in EMS we should also package a house or structure when
we're finished. Each room should be completely ventilated. This will reduce smoke damage. The
furniture should be covered with plastic. Water on counter tops and wooden furniture should be wiped
off. The furniture should be raised up (blocked) to prevent water damage. Excess debris should be
cleared off the floor. It will make the rooms look much cleaner and help alleviate the traumatic impact
of the fire for our customers. Debris should be brought outside, kept away from the entrance, be
covered with plastic, and anchored.
Customer valuables such as photo albums, video and audio tapes, clothing and other keepsakes found
in closets need to be carefully wrapped and placed in boxes. Contents of the box should be marked on
the outside for easier retrieval. Do not bag or box wet items. They will need time to dry before
packaging.
Access holes where ceilings were pulled, roofs, or walls that were opened should be "squared up" on
structural members except where special hazards are present (i.e., asbestos, etc.).
"Securing" the fire scene is also a function of loss control. Securing refers to actions required to protect
the structures and contents from damage or looting after fire companies have departed from the scene.
Roof ventilation holes and broken windows should be covered with plastic or other materials to reduce
weather damage and deter vandalism. The rolled plastic is ideal for this use. For safety reasons,
remaining glass shreds should be removed from the frames of broken windows prior to installing covers
and always prior to leaving the scene.
ADDITIONAL CUSTOMER SERVICE ELEMENTS
Performing loss control is a mark toward excellence in service delivery. It is a "signature" of
professionalism in our craft. We should continually try to add quality and value to our work. In some
cases, where safe to do so, escorting the customer through the fire area can help him/her see and
visualize what we did and the need for overhaul operations. Also, proper loss control measures should
be completed prior to any walk through. Act like the place is yours and the people who own and
occupy it are your loved ones...This usually will lead us in the right direction.
In many cases, wearing dirty turnouts into a home on EMS or service calls can soil the furnishings. By
keeping our turnouts clean, we could avoid unnecessary damage to
flooring, walls or furniture. Simply hose off boots and pants after each fire call to eliminate or minimize
loss created by dirty turnouts. This will also help to keep them decontaminated.
Loss control measures may have to be suspended due to fire investigation needs. In this case, fire
companies may have to return after the fire investigation to complete loss control activities.
Companies should select an appropriate location for outside piles of debris. Debris in high travel areas
should be avoided. Minimize trauma to the customer by helping to make the scene appear less
devastating.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

LOSS CONTROL
M.P. 202.12

04/95-R

Page 5 of 5

Part of the customer service effort is managing our conduct and behavior appropriately. We should be
on our best behavior when working on the emergency scene.
The pets we encounter are, often times, considered by the owners a part of the family. While our
primary mission is for the protection and care of people, we should attempt to provide an appropriate
level of care and respect to animals in distress. Whenever feasible and safe to do so and as part of our
commitment to customer service, we should display an open, caring concern for pets and animals when
dealing with a full range of situations.
On larger incidents loss control will be a significant part of the operation and additional
resources/alarms may be necessary to insure the effectiveness of loss control efforts.
Loss control efforts will increase the value our customers place on our work. There is no question that
we should strive to improve our services. Loss control is an area where we can always improve.

