PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

MONITORING ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS
M.P. 204.06

10/97-R

Page 1 of 1

This procedure establishes policy and procedures for all personnel involved in making atmospheric
measurements using monitoring instruments.
PURPOSE
The purpose of this policy and procedure is to establish the highest level of accuracy for atmospheric
monitoring instruments. This will allow the user and field personnel to operate in high levels of
instrument accuracy. This ongoing methodology for spanning and calibrating of atmospheric monitoring
instruments should ensure the highest level of safety for all personnel.
RESPONSIBILITIES
It shall be the responsibility of all members using, or supervising the use of, atmospheric monitoring
instruments to span and/or calibrate these devices in the following manner.
SPANNING
Spanning and/or calibration shall be done on each instrument (except RMD* instruments) prior to
making entry into the following atmospheres:
• contaminated atmospheres
• atmospheres which may suddenly become contaminated
• atmospheres where there is suspected oxygen deficiency
• atmospheres which are suspected of being contaminated or oxygen deficient
or at any other time it may be necessary to render an instrument in a ready state of condition. This
instrument will be spanned on the proper calibration gas, hose and regulator to ensure the instrument
of choice is in proper operating condition. At any time the instrument does not span or calibrate
correctly, and you cannot resolve the problem, you will not use the instrument. You will then bring the
instrument to the Special Operations Section and change out for another instrument.
TRACKING
To keep track of all the spanning and calibration being performed on all atmospheric monitoring
instruments, a Control Log has been developed. It is called the "Meter Calibration and Span Control
Log." This Control Log will be used to document weekly calibration and spanning being done prior to
the use of the instruments. The form will be completed on a monthly basis and forwarded to the
Special Operations Sector.
Calibration of instruments shall be on a weekly basis to ensure proper maintenance is being performed
on all instruments, according to manufacturer's recommendations. Calibration of all instruments
(except RMD* instruments) shall be performed at the Special Operations Section on a monthly basis
and logged into master control file for each instrument. This master control file shall act as a legal
history of that instrument's performance.
*RMD--Radiological Monitoring Devices

