PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

AIR OPERATONS
M.P. 201.07

09/01-R

Page 1 of 9

SCOPE
Several public and private helicopter services are available for various purposes, including emergency
medical transportation, rescue from inaccessible locations, aerial reconnaissance of emergency
scenes, brush firefighting, and emergency transportation of personnel and/or equipment.
The agencies involved in these services and available for emergencies are:
Air Evac
Life Net
Mesa Police Department
Native Air
Department of Public Safety
Phoenix Police Department
Sheriff's Department
Arizona Army National Guard
Television Stations Channels 3, 5, 10, 12, 15
Air Services International
PROCEDURES
Each agency's operating procedures, along with equipment and training limitations, present different
operational capabilities. Command should request the type of helicopter and pilot support needed for a
particular situation. Information on each agency is maintained in the CAD system.
Fire personnel should not fly with pilots or in aircraft that have not been approved and appropriately
carded. If Command has a concern about the ability of the pilot or the overall safety of the operation,
Command should stop the operation immediately.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL TRANSPORTATION
Helicopter transportation is available for patients within city areas, when time and distance affect
ground transportation time. When sufficient ambulances are unavailable, or when patients are in
locations inaccessible to ground units, helicopter transportation should be considered.
Med-Evac helicopters are capable of carrying; only one Immediate patient. Additional helicopters
should be requested for incidents involving multiple Immediate patients. These aircraft are not
approved for Technical Rescue air operations.
DPS helicopters are capable of carrying one patient only. DPS helicopter pilots must be advised of a
litter patient prior to taking off or landing so that the interior of the helicopter can be put in proper
configuration to accommodate the patient.
Helicopter medical transportation should be considered for -- Immediate trauma patients requiring
urgent surgery, patients requiring specialized treatment (OB, pediatric, burns, neurological.) or any
other patient Medical Control deems necessary.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

AIR OPERATONS
M.P. 201.07

09/01-R

Page 2 of 9

AERIAL RECONNAISSANCE
Aerial observation may be desirable to assist Command in complex situations. This has proven
extremely effective in brush firefighting, complex structural fires involving difficult access, high-rise fires,
and for tracking direction and distance of air contamination at haz mat fires. Helicopters may be
requested to place a fire department observer overhead with communications to Command.
Helicopters belonging to television stations and other media aircraft have been requested to avoid
interference with ground operations. The same rules apply to landing in the incident area as apply to
any other helicopters.
News station helicopters may be requested to provide assistance at incidents. Most news station
helicopters have the capability to communicate on fire channels.
During major incidents, Command may request to have the surrounding airspace restricted to avoid
interference with emergency operations. The request must be made to the FAA Flight Service Station.
(Contact information is maintained in CAD file). News helicopters may or may not be restricted from
this space at the discretion of command. News helicopters are not approved for use in technical
rescue (SPECIAL USE) operations except as aerial observers.
TRANSPORTATION OF PERSONNEL AND/OR EQUIPMENT
Helicopters may be requested for transportation of personnel and/or equipment urgently needed at the
scene of an emergency, particularly when distance is a factor. The request for assistance should
include the number of personnel and the weight and volume of equipment to be transported.
Helicopters may also be used to transport personnel and equipment to the top of a high-rise building or
across difficult terrain for firefighting purposes. An appropriately sized landing zone should be identified
in close proximity to the staging area, with enough space and separation to provide for safe operations.
BRUSH FIREFIGHTING
Two methods of brush firefighting are available using helicopters. The Phoenix Police Air Unit has the
ability to put two Bambi Buckets in service and are available to respond to brush fires to provide aerial
water drop capability.
The Mesa Police Department has the ability to put one Bambi Bucket in service.
The Phoenix Fire Department currently has four buoy wall tanks. Mesa Fire Department has one buoy
wall. The buoy wall tanks will hold either 3,000 or 4,000 gallons of water.
The Bambi Buckets can hold from 67 to 96 gallons of water, depending on air temperature and humidity
and may be filled from a canal, buoy wall tank, or any other body of water that is available.
All drop instructions and reporting effectiveness of drops will be relayed to pilot by Command or an
individual designated by Command. All personnel will remain clear of the drop zone.
NOTE: Helicopters with full buckets are prohibited from flying over occupied structures or traffic.
Roadways must be closed or structures evacuated if no other flight path can be used.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

AIR OPERATONS
M.P. 201.07

09/01-R

Page 3 of 9

BUOY WALL SET UP
The engine company assigned to the landing zone sector will assist the water tender driver with set up
and filling the buoy wall tank. The buoy wall must be set up in a large flat area clear of overhead
obstruction. Place one or two salvage covers on the ground to protect the bottom of the tank. Buoy wall
tanks fill from the bottom only. Start filling the tank slowly after approximately one foot of water is in the
tank the flow rate can be increased. Foam concentrate can be added to the tank when it is about one
foot from the top.
NOTE: Apparatus must be kept at least 150' to the side of the flight path of helicopters dipping the tank.
CONTRACT HELICOPTER SERVICES
This service is provided by contract with the Phoenix Fire Department and involves an hourly charge for
service. These helicopters can drop approximately 120 gallons of water on each pass over the fire. The
drop can be directed on one spot or along a running pass.
One or more helicopters may be requested for the operation. Average flying time per fuel load is 1-1/2
to two hours and a refueling vehicle can be dispatched to the scene.
An engine company shall be assigned to control the landing zone. A supply line shall be laid from a
hydrant and two 1-1/2 inch lines shall be extended. Lines are to refill belly tanks, wet down area, and to
provide fire protection.
Crews will approach the helicopter only after making eye contact with the pilot and the pilot has to refill
and re-arm belly tank. All refilling is done from the right side of the aircraft.
Crews will approach and withdraw along the same path; to front of the aircraft within 45 degrees. When
the crew is clear and off to the sides, the landing zone officer will signal the pilot for take-off.
All drop instructions and reporting effectiveness of drops will be relayed to pilot by Command or an
individual designated by Command. All personnel will remain clear of the drop zone.
RESCUE
Helicopters are particularly suited for physical rescue of persons stranded in inaccessible locations.
Depending on the location of the victim, a helicopter may be useful in removing the victim or placing
rescue personnel in a position to reach the victim.
Technical Rescue Team personnel, along with proper helicopter agency, should be considered for
access to particularly difficult locations. The risk of using helicopters and placing rescue personnel in
dangerous situations must be weighed against the urgency of the rescue situation. These
considerations may be critical during hours of darkness or poor flying weather.
SPECIAL USE
“Special Use” of helicopters are activities that require pilots and rescuers to use certified technical
rescue skills to affect the rescue of a patient or patients that are in critical condition or life-threatening
situations. These are high-risk operations that can pose a serious threat to the life safety of both
patients and rescuers.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

AIR OPERATONS
M.P. 201.07

09/01-R

Page 4 of 9

The following are considered “Special Use” helicopters operations:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

External load (slingloads, longlines, water bucket, etc.)
Hover sites (low-level hovering)
Helicopter rappelling (insertions and extraction’s)
Flights conducted below 500 feet above ground level (AGL)
Helicopter operations around a fire perimeter
Single skid landings
Any takeoff or landing requiring special pilot technique due to terrain, obstacles, or surface
condition.

Any “Special Use” of helicopters during rescue operations will require a Technical Rescue Sector to be
established by Command. It shall be the responsibility of the Technical Rescue Sector officer to
establish and coordinate the rescue plan with the appropriate pilots and Fire Command.
“Special Use” helicopter operations shall only be performed by certified City of Phoenix Police
Department pilots and Phoenix Fire Department Technical Rescue Technicians. Prior to initiating any
rescue operation that required the “Special Use” of a helicopter, a risk benefit analysis will be
completed by Technical Sector Officer (T.S.O), Phoenix PD pilot, and Command. The “Special Use”
operation will only continue if this analysis determines the patient to be in critical condition, or a lifethreatening situation exist for the patient(s) or rescuers.
HELICOPTER LOAD CALCULATION
Any “Special Use” of helicopters during rescue operations will require proper load calculations to be
completed. Prior to initiating a rescue the pilot will perform a power check. After landing, the pilot will
meet with the Technical Rescue Sector officer or a representative; together they will complete and sign
the helicopter load calculation form. The load calculation form will be required for both internal and
external loads.
The load calculation form will be retained by Technical Rescue Sector officer and submitted with the
T.R.T. rescue report.
The pilot will insure that proper loading procedures are followed. All helicopters will be flown within the
center-of-gravity envelope and gross weight limitations.
COMMUNICATIONS
Air-to-ground communications shall be used whenever possible to give landing instructions to
approaching helicopters. Dispatch will coordinate the establishment of air-to-ground communications.
The pilot of a helicopter approaching the scene will advise Dispatch when ready to communicate with
ground units. Dispatch will assign the radio channel to be used and advise Command of the identity of
the helicopter. Direct air-to-ground communications shall then be established between the helicopter
and Landing Zone personnel. Personnel in the landing area should have direct communications with
the pilot before landing.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

AIR OPERATONS
M.P. 201.07

09/01-R

Page 5 of 9

When helicopters are actively engaged in operations at the scene of an incident, Command should
assign all helicopter communications to a separate radio channel and designate a person to work
exclusively with this channel.
“Special Use” operations require a designated radio channel that is clear of any other traffic.
NOTE: National Guard helicopters have no direct communications capability with fire department
ground units. Landing instructions must be given by hand signals.
Helicopters will not land in the incident area without first making contact with ground units. If unable to
make contact on an assigned channel, the arriving helicopter shall circle or hover in the vicinity until
contact is established.
Helicopters may be directed to land via hand or light signals when radio communication proves
unfeasible. Landings shall not be made in proximity to the incident without positive contact (radios or
hand signals).
FIREBIRD
Firebird is the designation for a helicopter operating under the direction of the Phoenix Fire
Department. This includes Phoenix Police helicopters providing aerial reconnaissance, brush
firefighting operations, transportation, or special use operations.
The designations "Firebird 1,2,3" etc., will be used to identify different helicopters in use on any one
incident. Mesa Police Department helicopter designation is Falcon. Falcon 3 & 4 have the same
capabilities as Firebird.
Ranger 41
Ranger 41 is the designation for the helicopter operating under the direction of the Department of
Public Safety. This unit is staffed with 1 DPS officer/pilot, 1 DPS officer/paramedic, and 1 Phoenix Fire
paramedic. R-41 has capabilities for emergency medical transportation and aerial reconnaissance
transportation of manpower and equipment.
LANDING ZONES
The selection of an appropriate landing zone is of critical importance in all field situations. A suitable
landing area must be located and identified for the pilot. Should anything become unsafe during the
approach of any helicopter during landing operations instruct the pilot to GO AROUND three
times.
Command will assign personnel to select and identify a landing zone. The assigned personnel shall
have a portable radio, eye protection, ear protection, high-visibility safety vests. All personnel assigned
to the landing zone operation shall be on the designated landing zone radio frequency. Engine
companies are more suitable for this assignment.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

AIR OPERATONS
M.P. 201.07

09/01-R

Page 6 of 9

The landing zone must be relatively flat and free of obstructions for an area of at least 100' x 100' for
each helicopter. All spectators, vehicle traffic (including emergency vehicles) and animals must be kept
a minimum of 200' away from the landing zone. In the center of the landing zone, a 60' x 60' "touch
down" area shall be identified with appropriate visual markers. The individual communicating with the
pilot shall stand at the front right corner (as seen by the pilot) of the touch down area. A visual check
should be made for overhead wires, poles, towers, and similar obstructions. Any obstructions noted
must be communicated to the pilot before he/she is committed. The pilot can then assess the
obstruction.
“Special Use” landing zones are defined as any landing zone where the pilot cannot land and shut
down power to the aircraft. “Special Use” landing zones are technical by nature and shall be staffed by
members of the Technical Rescue Team at both the base and off-site landing zones.
The approach and departure paths (into the wind) must be free of obstructions. For heavily loaded
helicopters (i.e., water drop), the clear path should extend at least 100 yards in each direction.

Approach and departure paths should not pass over a treatment area, Command Post, or other activity
areas where noise and rotor wash will cause problems.
The landing zone should be located at least 100 yards from other activity areas.
The landing zone and surrounding area must be free of small objects which can be blown around by
rotor wash. Check for metal objects and secure loose clothing or blankets.
Avoid dusty locations if possible. If the landing area is dusty, wet down the area with a hose line before
landing.
Once a helicopter has landed the pilot may elect to shut down for added safety in the landing zone.
While the helicopter is on the ground, whether running or not, a "tail guard" shall be stationed 50 to 100
feet from the tail rotor to keep the area secured. At no time shall personnel pass behind the body of
the helicopter and the tail rotor.
Radio contact and the landing zone shall be maintained for two to three minutes after departure of the
helicopter in case an in-flight emergency is experienced and the helicopter needs to return to the
landing zone.
HELICOPTER SAFETY FACTORS
• Approach and depart helicopter from the front or 45 degrees from the front, in a crouching
position; remain in view of the pilot.
• Establish eye contact with pilot or observer before approaching if rotors are moving.
• Do not approach helicopter after landing until pilot or observer signals approval to approach
aircraft.
• Approach and depart in pilot's or observer's field of vision (never towards the tail rotor).
• At no time will personnel approach the tail area of any helicopter.
• Landing zone personnel shall use eye protection or helmet face shields and ear protection.
Helmet chinstraps shall be tightened securely.
• Use a chinstrap or secure hardhat when working around main rotor.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

AIR OPERATONS
M.P. 201.07

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

09/01-R

Page 7 of 9

Keep landing areas clear of loose articles that may "fly" in the rotor down wash.
Provide wind indicators for take-off and landings; back to the wind, arms extended in front of
body.
Beware of rotor wash. Small objects and clothing (caps, jackets, etc.) can be blown around
easily. Do not grab or chase articles blown off by the rotor wash.
Be aware the spotlights used to illuminate obstructions can blind the pilot. Extreme caution
should be used. Only use spotlights to illuminate the bottom of poles. Do not shine upward.
Fasten seat belt upon entering helicopter and leave buckled until pilot signals to exit. Fasten
seat belt behind you before leaving.
Use the door latches as instructed; caution should be exercised around moving parts or
Plexiglas.
Do not throw items from the helicopter.
Carry tools horizontally and below waist level, never upright or over shoulder.
Secure items internally and externally on the helicopter.
Provide pilot with accurate weights and types of baggage.
Stage patients waiting to be loaded at least 150 feet away. Secure sheets and blankets and
cover eyes during landing.

PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT (PPE)
PPE consists of clothing and equipment that provide protection to an individual in a hazardous
environment.
All fire personnel and crew members will wear the following PPE when operating in or on the helicopter.
Flight Helmet: Must provide protection for the head.
Exceptions: TRT helmets or helicopter headsets may be used when a flight helmet is not necessary.
(Flight helmets must be worn during long-line operations.) Fire helmets may be used by brush
firefighters being transported to and from sites and firefighters in full protective clothing.
Fire Resistant Clothing: Nomex jumpsuit with length sufficient to eliminate exposure between boots
and gloves, or structural firefighting coat and pants.
Exception: Brush firefighters may wear FR pants and Nomex brush jacket.
Leather Boots: Should extend above ankle.
Exception: Working in an environment not conducive to wearing leather boots.
Gloves: Should be leather or Nomex and leather.
SURFACE SELECTION
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Concrete
Asphalt
Grass
Compacted dirt (lightly moistened to control dust)
Dry, loose dirt/sand (heavily moistened to control dust)

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

AIR OPERATONS
M.P. 201.07

Page 8 of 9

09/01-R

300'

LANDING
ZONE

TREATMENT AREA

1

100'

Departure

x

UPWIND
MARKER

LZ Officer

Approach

100'
Tail Guard

2

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

AIR OPERATONS
M.P. 201.07

09/01-R

Page 9 of 9

HELICOPTER HAND SIGNALS

