PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES
Policy Name:
Policy Number:
FIRE CONTROL
M.P. 202.04
This policy is for internal use only and is not intended, nor should it be construed to expand
the legal duty under the law or expand civil liability in any way. This policy does not create a
higher duty of care under the law to act. Remedies for violations of this policy, if proven, are
limited to administrative disciplinary action against PFD employees.
Related Policies: 202.02C, 202.12E, 202.11, 202.20
Other Reference: NFPA 1710, UL FSRI
Date Implemented: 12/2022-R
Review Date: 12/2028

PROCEDURE
It is the standard operating procedure to stabilize fire conditions by an aggressive, well-placed fire
attack. Any initial attack must attempt to overwhelm fire conditions with well-placed water
application and suppression efforts from the most advantageous position(s) to include interior,
exterior, or a transitional attack. A transitional attack should be considered when you are passing
fire to fight fire and/or conditions need to be changed from the exterior prior to making entry. The
fire attack must utilize adequate water volume (gpm) for the fire conditions, heat release rate, and
structure/compartment size to control the fire, protect victims and/or property, as well as prevent
extension into exposed structures.
PRINCIPALS OF FIRE ATTACK
The most fundamental job of the Phoenix Regional Fire Departments is implementing an effective
fire attack. Size up, risk management, and rescue profile drive the strategy, ultimately deciding the
best tactics for fire attack. It is necessary to determine the complexity of the compartments, flow
path, and exposures when gauging possible fire attacks. Knowledge and understanding of fire
behavior and water application are necessary to mitigate the hazard, impact savable
lives/property, and remain as safe as possible.
RESIDENTIAL FIRES
By definition, this procedure considers residential fires to be any structures that our community
typically resides. This includes mobile homes, houses, multi-family residences, apartments (low-,
mid-, or high-rise occupancies), and any buildings that are lived in. These can range from small
structures to large multi-story buildings. Firefighting in these structures should be done with a
thorough size-up of life safety potential.
Fire control is a crucial component of improving the possibility of savable lives on the fireground.
When possible, search and rescue efforts should be performed simultaneously with fire attack to
allow for the best outcomes. Effective fire control also directly impacts the possibility of savable
property. Simply put, extinguishing the fire makes everything better on the fireground.
FIRE CONTROL
Page 1 of 9

Effective fire suppression techniques include understanding the principles of fire behavior. In
order to execute fire control, it must be understood what actions best extinguish interior fires.
Interior surface cooling with water, then followed by water application to the burning
fuels/contents is the most effective extinguishing tactic. This directly impacts interior spaces and
tenability for victims and firefighters. An effective fire attack requires appropriate water volume to
overwhelm and control the fire. The fire area's size and/or volume must be part of a thorough size
up in determining appropriate water volumes as a part of a well-supported fire attack. The ability
to get water flow to the best possible locations, from either the interior or the exterior, requires
effective hose line deployment with hose lines of adequate length and size for the desired water
flow. Utilizing the transitional attack involves water application from the exterior to change
conditions prior to making an interior attack. Size up of the fire structure and the distances and
items that are challenging the ease and direction of attack lines is a critical function of Company
Officers directing the fire attack.
When ventilation limited conditions are discovered during size up, an interior fire attack is typically
the best option. When interior fire attack is the best option, suppression efforts directed through
the inlet of interior flow paths are the most advantageous. The use of water volume, effective hose
stream patterns, and nozzle manipulation are critical to cooling the immediate environment for
firefighters advancing on the fire and increasing the pressures to change the flow path direction
away from firefighters. Fire attack and coordinated ventilation provide greater survivability,
firefighter safety, and property conservation. Intelligent fire attack techniques and coordinated
ventilation are essential to effective operations.
When there is a fire in an unventilated compartment, coordinated ventilation in the fire
compartment simultaneous to the fire attack will exhaust the super-heated fire gasses and smoke
ahead of the advancing attack crew. Ultimately, this tactic changes the flow path direction by
over-pressurizing the pathway firefighters are using to make their attack and pushing it back to
the fire compartment and out of the exhaust point. A fire attack against the flow path, without
the ability to manage the ventilation, is a tactic and should only occur out of necessity.
Understanding air movement and interior pressures should be evaluated and identified as a part
of a size up prior to effective fire attack tactics. This recognition and understanding allows for more
efficient fire suppression as well as improving interior survivability. Fire suppression from the
most advantageous position (interior or exterior) can significantly impact the thermal insult,
pressures, and flow path inside a fire building. Cooling the interior conditions reduces pressures
and may create favorable conditions for supplemental fire attack and interior search efforts.
Fire control is best supported with coordinated ventilation that is well planned and communicated
utilizing fire behavior principles. This can be accomplished in multiple ways, including vertical and
horizontal methods. Uncoordinated ventilation will make fire control more difficult, increasing
both toxic gasses and thermal insult; this is dangerous and decreases tenability for potential

FIRE CONTROL
Page 2 of 9

victims. Access and egress openings must be considered as ventilation and effectively managed
during fire attack operations.
UL-FSRI: FIRE SUPPRESSION VIDEOS

Tactical Consideration: There Can Be Survivable Spaces on Arrival
Tactical Consideration: Nothing Showing Means Nothing
Tactical Consideration: Flow Path and Suppression must be Considered Together
Tactical Consideration: Interior Suppression with only Smoke Showing
Tactical Consideration: The Closest Door to the Apparatus Should Not Dictate Line Placement
Tactical Consideration: Exterior Attack with Fire Showing from the Entry Point
Tactical Consideration: Initiate Your Fire Attack on the Same Level as the Fire
COMMERCIAL FIRES
By definition, this procedure considers commercial buildings to be any structures that our
community typically conducts business, manufacturing, storage, or typically non-residential in
nature. These can be varying in size and complexity. Commercial buildings can be free-standing,
part of or connected to other occupancies, and can be multi-story above and/or below grade. They
can contain large volumes of contents and include hazardous materials or processes. They can be
less compartmentalized than residential structures and have larger overall spaces. Commercial
occupancies in the Phoenix regional area can exceed 1 million square feet in space. Residential
fire tactics and flow rates should not be used in commercial fires, and NFPA 1710 target flows
should be the minimum.
Commercial building fires can have a life safety potential when experiencing fire conditions. The
greatest difference between commercial and residential life safety is firefighters' ability to impact
that life safety problem. Residential occupancies can allow for more effective search operations
due to the confined nature and fire area volumes. Search operations in large open areas, large
complex interior arrangements, or industrial settings with severe or worsening fire and smoke
conditions are ineffective and dangerous. As in any structure, the best thing we can do for any
potential victims is to extinguish the fire when possible. In cases of a known rescue, a targeted
search is possible with a thorough understanding of the fire and smoke conditions and a legitimate
assessment of the position in the risk management plan.
Commercial fires require an understanding of fire behavior as well. Commercial fires are more
complex, involve large areas and large content loads that can produce intense, severe fire
conditions. The best opportunity to extinguish commercial fires is to catch them at their smallest
FIRE CONTROL
Page 3 of 9

state after arrival with a well-executed fire attack that overwhelms the fire conditions. When
present, building fire suppression systems should be supported as early as possible as well. Water
volume and aggressive exposure protection are critical. Exposure protection may require interior
and roof positions or exterior operations depending on the building's conditions and structural
integrity.
All resources should be directed to fire attack operations from the onset unless a known rescue is
present. In this case, crews assigned to rescue must reassess the fire conditions, structural
stability, re-evaluate their risk management plan and communicate the necessary support actions.
Sector Officers and/or the IC must be able to support the fire attack operations and manage the
strategic level risk management plan to determine the duration of time it is possible for this rescue
to occur.
When working in the offensive strategy, the Company Officer should consider the need to attack
the fire with large volume handlines capable of flowing a minimum of 250 GPM from the most
advantageous positions. NFPA 1710 standard is a minimum of three hand lines with an overall
volume of 500 GPM or greater. Water application may be done from an exterior position utilizing
a transitional attack to improve conditions prior to entry. When conditions, or forecasted
conditions, prohibit safe and effective interior fire suppression the strategy should be changed to
defensive.
Water application may be done from interior positions as conditions and risk management allow
an offensive strategy or may be conducted from the exterior in an attempt to gain control of the
conditions or change to a defensive strategy. The fire attack's position and effort will determine
the most appropriate method to deploy 250+ GPM from the necessary tactical positions. Company
Officers and/or Sector Officers' responsibility is to direct the attack to determine the most
appropriate methods to engage a commercial fire.
Regardless of the strategy, a deliberate volume of water must be used to attempt to overwhelm
the fire and heat conditions.
Fire control in commercial fires is best supported with coordinated ventilation that is well planned
and communicated utilizing fire behavior principles. The greatest challenges for ventilation in
commercial fires are the buildings' size, the ability to create ventilation that is effective in
supporting the fire attack, and interior conditions. It is necessary to consider the size of ventilation
exhaust points to effectively improve interior conditions. This requires a size up of natural
openings and the opportunity to create openings for horizontal or vertical ventilation. The use of
windows and doors may provide better ventilation in coordination with fire attack than vertical
ventilation. The greatest challenge with vertical ventilation is the ability to create a large enough
opening in comparison to the building volume to provide adequate ventilation. It may be
impossible to cut a ventilation hole large enough to adequately exhaust interior heat and smoke.
The IC must work with Sector Officers to determine the potential and available options to ventilate

FIRE CONTROL
Page 4 of 9

fires in commercial buildings. The intent of this coordination is to prevent rapid fire growth with
fire companies inside the building.
150 FOOT RULE

The simple expectation is that no fire companies should operate on the interior of any
structure, during firefighting operations, beyond their ability to retreat to an area of safe refuge
prior to their low air alarm going off.
During the recovery after the LODD of Firefighter Brett Tarver, the Phoenix Fire Department
established that the maximum distance any company should advance and operate inside of a
structure with smoke and fire conditions is 150 feet. This was determined by the standard lengths
of our attack lines and the capacity of SCBA air to allow ingress, working time, and egress without
the low air alarm sounding/vibrating.
There are variables that can limit the reasonable maximum distance fire companies should
operate inside a structure. These include smoke and fire conditions, building construction or
layout, occupancy type, interior obstacles, and the overall physical effort required to advance into
a building that increases the air consumption rate.
For the purposes of mid-rise and high-rise buildings, the 150-foot rule is defined as the maximum
distance any company should operate on the interior of any structure from the exterior entrance
or other protected interior access points. This is measured from any area of safe refuge to the end
of the hoseline length stretched into the building. In instances where fire crews are entering a
structure from the exterior doors without protect areas of refuge, the 150’ is measured from that
door. Areas of safe refuge are considered stair wells, stair landings, or any area that can be
protected by doors and potentially pressurized to keep smoke and fire out. These include
structures that have standpipes in the stairwells that are designed for the connection of fire hoses
that can be protected with doors and means of managing the interior environment.
FIRE ATTACK FROM STANDPIPES
As the City of Phoenix grows, there has been and will continue to be an increase in buildings with
large square footages and multi-story construction requiring an understanding of building
suppression systems. In addition, firefighting personnel must have an understanding of the types
of firefighting equipment necessary to ensure an effective fire attack from standpipes. These
include commercial and residential occupancies, from 1 story to 40+ stories. Standpipe firefighting
has multifaceted considerations based on the presence of building systems as well as the size,
layout, and complexity of the structures. Critical keys to consider when initiating a fire attack from
a standpipe include:
•

Ability to provide adequate water supply either utilizing building systems or engine
company pumps

FIRE CONTROL
Page 5 of 9

•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Ability to provide high pump discharge pressures to adequately take over for
malfunctioning or inadequate building fire pumps (Tandem pumping and high-pressure
supply hose should be considered).
Ability to provide adequate water pressure, depending on the hose and nozzle used, to
the highest/farthest standpipe outlet.
Ability to provide fire department external shut off at standpipe connections.
Ability to determine adequate flow at the nozzle.
Ability to flow NFPA 13E and 1710 recommended GPM for initial and subsequent fire
attack from standpipe connections.
Ability to flow NFPA 1710 recommended GPM from standpipes on multiple floors
simultaneously.
Knowledge and understanding of pressure reducing and pressure restricting appliances
as a part of standpipe systems and their limiting factors for firefighting.
Ability to stretch hose lines from standpipe connections to the fire location that can be
limited by smoke and heat conditions in stairwells and common hallways.

FIRE ATTACK EQUIPMENT AND STANDARDS
The Phoenix Fire Department has a flexible set of hose and nozzle packages to execute an effective
fire attack. Each has a specific range of effectiveness to cover the broad potential of residential
and commercial fires. It is the expected standard that Firefighters are proficient with these tools
and in understanding their capabilities. It is expected that Company Officers and Sector Officers
can determine the most effective fire attack operations and supervise their deployment and
operations. It is expected that Incident Commanders can determine the overall fire attack
requirements for the incident in its entirety and provide direction and leadership to tactical
positions as to the overall incident action plan and specifically fire attack for the given incident.
The current standards for water volume for fire attack and the specific hose and nozzle
combinations currently carried by Phoenix Fire Engine Companies are:
• Standard water flows from hose lines and appliances
o Residential
 150 GPM – (2.5 gallons per second) (1.75” hose lines with automatic nozzles)
o Commercial
 250 GPM - (5 gallons per second) (2” and 2.5” hose lines with fixed gallonage
or smooth bore nozzles)
 500 GPM - (8 gallons per second) (portable appliances)
 600+ GPM – (10+ gallons per second) (deck gun or ladder pipe)
These expectations meet or exceed national best practices and NFPA 1700 and 1710 guidance.
The current hose and nozzle packages that are carried on Phoenix Fire Engine Companies include:
o

1 ¾” hose line with automatic nozzles (x2 minimum)
 Hose lengths include:
FIRE CONTROL
Page 6 of 9

o

o

• 150’ crosslay
• 200’ crosslay
• 100’ to 150’ front bumper line
 Automatic nozzle (75/45 psi nozzle pressure for 70 to 200 GPM)
2” hoseline with smooth bore nozzles (x1)
 Hose length:
• 200’ crosslay or rear mount depending on apparatus manufacturer
 Smooth bore nozzles with 1 1/16” tip (240 GPM at 50 psi nozzle pressure)
2 ½” hose line with smooth bore nozzles (1 or 2 depending on apparatus
manufacturer)
 Hose length:
• 200’ rear mount (1 or 2 depending on apparatus manufacturer)
 Smooth bore nozzle with 1 3/16” tip (300 GPM at 50 psi nozzle pressure)
 Blitz Monitor with solid bore or peripheral tips (up to 500 GPM)

A necessary component of an effective fire attack is the firefighter's ability to operate specific hose
and nozzle packages at the required water flows. A component of effective and safe hose line
operation in a fire attack is nozzle reaction. Nozzle reaction is defined as the force exerted by the
fire nozzle on the Firefighter. The Phoenix Fire Department standard for nozzle reaction is 70 lbs.
for single Firefighter operations. Anything above should require additional Firefighters (s) or
operations from the fixed positions on the ground to operate effectively and safely. Any fire attack
operations should utilize as many Firefighters as required to deploy, flow, move, and ensure
operational safety depending on the line length, diameter, flow, and nozzle reaction.
The Phoenix Fire Department standard is as follows:
•
•
•
•

1 ¾” hoseline with 75 psi automatic nozzle (in high pressure/blue setting) @ 150 gpm
o 1 firefighter operation (average 65 lbs. nozzle reaction during testing)
1 ¾” hoseline with 45 psi automatic nozzle (in low pressure/red setting) @ 150 gpm
o 1 Firefighter operation (average 60 lbs. nozzle reaction during testing)
2” hoseline with 1 1/16” solid bore nozzle @ 240 gpm
o 2 Firefighter minimum operation (average 85 lbs. nozzle reaction during testing)
2 ½” hoseline with 1 3/16” solid bore nozzle @ 300 gpm
o 3 Firefighter minimum operation (average 110 lbs. nozzle reaction during testing)

A water supply is a critical component to an effective fire attack. Standard Phoenix Engine
Company apparatus typically carry 500 gallons of water (+ or – 50 gallons, depending on the
apparatus generation). There are a very small amount of exceptions to this in the Phoenix Fire
Department, and an intimate knowledge of each independent apparatus is always required. The
establishment of an uninterrupted water supply for declared working fires can be a critical
component to appropriately support an effective and safe fire attack.

FIRE CONTROL
Page 7 of 9

Specific circumstances exist that it is reasonable for a first due Engine Company (with at least 450
gallons of onboard water) to not establish a hydrant supply line. These include fires with an
unknown location or route to the location in a neighborhood or apartment/business complex, fire
in a high-rise building, fires with a known rescue situation requiring immediate action, and/or
anytime an Incident Commander has calculated the need for a rapid-fire attack before an initial
supply line can be established. It is always the Incident Commander’s and/or Sector Officer’s
responsibility (depending on incident complexity) to ensure adequate, uninterrupted water
supplies are in place in all critical tactical positions to support effective fire attack operations.
Strategic Level Considerations
It is the incident commander’s responsibility to ensure that an effective fire attack from the most
appropriate positions is part of the incident action plan. The positions and volume will be
dependent on the incident size, complexity, incident strategy, and available resources.
Command must define Offensive/Defensive Strategy based upon the position in the risk
management plan. In addition, Command will consider the following when addressing fire
control:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Rescue profile of occupants
Fire/smoke volume
Fire extent
Structural conditions
Structural ingress and egress
Smoke conditions and ventilation profile
Available resources

A critical Command decision (both initial and ongoing) relates to the Offensive/Defensive Strategy
of the incident:
• Offensive Strategy—an exterior and/or interior fire attack, from inside the hazard zone, with
appropriate support work to best support creating and maintaining tenable spaces in
conjunction with search operations depending on the rescue profile and occupancy type.
• Defensive Strategy—A fire attack on the fire structure/occupancy from the most
advantageous positions and outside of the hazard zone. This fire attack should also work
to reduce fire extension into exposures, when possible, from the most advantageous
positions (interior or exterior), depending on structure, conditions, and position in the risk
management plan.
The Incident Commander will support any fire attack with whatever resources and action is
required to reduce fire extension and to bring the fire under control. Command must initially
declare the incident strategy and continue to confirm the strategy and the appropriate benchmarks
and elapsed time notifications.

FIRE CONTROL
Page 8 of 9

OPERATIONAL INFORMATION
BASIC OFFENSIVE PLAN:
• Assume command
• Incident size up and determination of critical factors
• Initial fire attack from the most advantageous position with most appropriate water
volume
• Conduct a primary search in coordination with fire attack when possible
• Provide coordinated support activities (e.g., ventilation, forcible entry)
• Support fire attack from the next most advantageous position with appropriate water
volume
• Address loss control and property conservation
• Evaluate actions and revise strategy and tactics as necessary
BASIC DEFENSIVE PLAN:
• Assume command
• Incident size up and determination of critical factors
• Write off what is lost, identify, and protect savable exposures
• Attack the fire from the most advantageous positions with most appropriate water
volume (large volume devices, well-placed positions)
• Work to support the needs of a high-volume fire attack (necessary water supply, pumped
water, etc.)
• Ensure adequate resources to support the operation fully
• Address fire extension, life safety, and loss control and property conservation in
exposures if risk management and strategy will allow
• Evaluate actions and revise strategy and tactics as necessary

FIRE CONTROL
Page 9 of 9

