Page |1

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

FIRE THREAT LIAISON OFFICER (TLO)
M.P. 201.05I

02/21

Page 1 of 2

PURPOSE
The purpose of this procedure is to define the roles and responsibilities of the Threat Liaison
Officer (TLO) in the Phoenix Regional Response System.
OVERVIEW
A large proportion of fire company responses involve some interaction of a routine nature
between Law Enforcement and Fire personnel. These incidents are regularly and routinely
handled in a very successful manner between the Company Officer and the Police Officers or
Supervisors that respond. When incidents occur that require coordination and communication
between law enforcement tactical units and fire companies, a request for the TLO of the
jurisdiction having authority (JHA) shall be made to ensure all involved agencies work
effectively. This coordination and communication is critical to ensure the safety of the
community and the public safety personnel.
The request for the TLO is made using an incident assigned tactical channel or by contacting
the appropriate regional dispatch center.
•
•

For those agencies dispatched by the Phoenix Regional Dispatch Center, contact the
Alarm Room Supervisor via phone at (602) 262-7496.
For those agencies dispatched by the Mesa Regional Dispatch Center, contact the
Alarm Room Supervisor via phone at (480) 644-2609.

The regional dispatch center will then contact the appropriate TLO for the jurisdiction, or
representative assigned, share pertinent information, and determine the requirement for a
response. The on-duty TLO will then contact the agency requesting assistance for additional
information, intelligence, and determination of what type of response will be required. In most
cases, this will include the initiation of a TLO nature code. For example, in the Phoenix Regional
Dispatch System, the on-duty TLO will initiate a TLO-Operation (TLOOPS CAD nature code)
and request the appropriate resources for the incident.
The TLO will assist in activities requiring coordination between the respective fire and law
enforcement agencies. This includes but is not limited to:
•

Law enforcement tactical operations, for example:
o Special Assignment Units (SAU) or Special Weapons & Tactics (SWAT)
o Fugitive Apprehension Investigations Detail (FAID)
o Street Crimes
o Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD)
o Phase 1 Barricades

Page |2

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

FIRE THREAT LIAISON OFFICER (TLO)
M.P. 201.05I

•

•

02/21

Page 2 of 2

Any nature code included in the following list:
o 962PD, A3, ARFMR, BARHOS, CRASH, DL, GSW2, GSW2PD, GSW2S,
GSW3, GSW3PD, GSW3S, GSWACT, GSWPD, GSWPDS, GSWSPD, INJPD,
JUMP, NBC, STAB2, STAB2S, STAB3, VIACT
Any request made by fire department or law enforcement personnel that require
additional coordination or an extended operation related to a law enforcement incident.

The assigned TLO will be responsible for determining each situation's specific needs and
communicating them to the law enforcement supervisor. The fire and law enforcement TLOs
should remain at the Command Post to facilitate continuing communications.
INCIDENT RESPONSE
Incidents that meet the mission of law enforcement are led by the law enforcement agency
having authority. These incidents may require Fire, EMS, or Special Operations functions to
work in conjunction or coordination with law enforcement to mitigate or react to a potential
hazard. In these situations, the Fire TLO should report to the Police Command Post to
coordinate requests for assistance from the Police Department.
At times, the on duty TLO will be asked to support law enforcement activities in other
municipalities. The on duty TLO will make the appropriate notifications to the TLO in the
responding jurisdiction in which municipality the law enforcement operation will take place in.
Any TLO responding to a law enforcement request that requires action in any other city or
jurisdiction shall communicate this response to the on-duty TLO for that jurisdiction (or
appropriate agency). At no time should a Fire TLO from any jurisdiction open a TLO-Operation
incident and request resources without first notifying the TLO in the municipality of the
operation.
A TLO-Operation shall require a TLO to serve as a liaison for fire response, coordinating efforts
with their law enforcement counterpart, intelligence officer, and Incident Commander. TLOOperations cannot be managed by any fire-based tactical EMS resource at any incident,
regardless of whether they are a trained TLO or not. These fire-based tactical EMS resources
include trained SWAT Medics, or TEMS personnel (or units).
Anytime a fire-based tactical EMS resource requests assistance, the Alarm Room Supervisor
should notify the on duty TLO for that jurisdiction. An on scene TLO, working outside of the
hazard zone, and dedicated to this function, must act as the liaison for fire companies at any
law enforcement incident. This is to ensure effective communication, coordination, and
operational focus between fire companies and law enforcement personnel.

