PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

MEDICAL INCIDENT COMMUNICATIONS
M.P. 205.03

10/97-R

Page 1 of 2

The Dispatch Center will dispatch an assignment to medical incidents according to the reported scale and
severity of the situation. The assignment will be upgraded by Command, as necessary, based on the
actual situation encountered.
Dispatch is responsible for notifying and activating other agencies, including hospitals, to provide needed
support for management of the incident. The following should be used as guidelines:
2-1 MEDICAL ASSIGNMENT
1. Determine approximate number and triage classification of patients.
2. Contact Level 1 and 2 hospitals when requested by Command. Advise hospitals of situation,
location, and number of patients involved. Determine current ability to receive patients.
3. Communicate hospital availability information to Command or Transportation Sector.
4. Advise notified hospitals when incident is terminated if they are not receiving any patients.
1ST ALARM--MEDICAL
1. Determine approximate number and triage classification of patients.
2. Place private medical helicopters and DPS Ranger on stand-by.
3. Contact Level 1 hospitals when requested by Command. Advise hospitals of situation, location,
and number of patients involved. Determine current ability to receive patients.
4. Communicate hospital availability to Command or Transportation Sector.
5. Dispatch rescues and helicopters as requested by Command.
6. Advise notified hospitals when incident is terminated if they are not receiving patients.
GREATER ALARM -- MEDICAL
Begin full-scale notification procedure. Continue until reports indicate situation has been stabilized.
NOTIFICATION PROCEDURES FOR MEDICAL DISASTER
This procedure applies to large scale mass casualty medical situations:
A. Rescues
1. Dispatch all available Fire Department rescues to Staging Area. Location shall be designated by
Command.
2. Dispatch private ambulance companies as needed.
3. Determine ETA and number of Rescues available.
4. Advise Command of number of Rescues responding.
5. Activate all reserve Fire Department Rescues.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

MEDICAL INCIDENT COMMUNICATIONS
M.P. 205.03

10/97-R

Page 2 of 2

B. Helicopters
1. Place private medical helicopters and DPS Ranger on stand-by. Determine number and availability
to respond.
2. Dispatch as requested by Command.
3. Advise helicopter of radio channel for Landing Zone coordination.
C. Hospitals
1. Advise hospitals and emergency centers of situation, location and approximate number of patients
involved. Ask hospitals to determine how many patients they can handle and to stand-by for call
back. Advise them not to call the Dispatch Center.
2. Call all Level 1 hospitals and specialty hospitals first. Call Level 2 facilities according to geographic
proximity to scene.
3. Call back medical facilities to determine ability to receive patients. Advise Transportation Sector
when ready to receive information.
4. Level 1 and 2 medical facilities should be notified according to their specific categories as they
relate to the incident (i.e., trauma, burns, pediatric, poisoning, etc.).
5. When Transportation Sector advises that all patients have been transported, confirm number of
patients sent to each hospital. Advise each notified hospital of total patients transported or enroute,
including those which will not receive any patients. Advise hospitals that no more patients are
expected to be transported.
D. City Buses
Ask Command if buses are needed. Dispatch Phoenix Transit buses to the Level 2 staging area.
NOTE: Phoenix Transit buses are radio dispatched.

