PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

TREATMENT SECTOR
M.P. 203.04

03/00-R

Page 1 of 3

A Treatment Sector is utilized to provide a site to manage the treatment of multiple IMMEDIATE and
DELAYED patients. Treatment Sector is responsible for establishing a treatment area to provide
stabilization and continuing care of patients until they can be transported to a medical facility. The objective
of the treatment sector is to rapidly treat and transport all patients.
Treatment Sector Responsibilities
The following items represent the standard operations that will normally be performed by the Treatment
Sector:
1. Identify whether patient treatment will occur “in place” or in a designated treatment area. Coordinate
with Triage and Extrication Sectors.
2. Determine resources.
3. Identify and establish a large treatment area. If incident is large, establish separate “Immediate” and
“Delayed” treatment areas.
4. Assign and supervise treatment teams.
5. Ensure that all patients have been triaged, assessed and re-triaged as needed.
6. Aggressive treatment and rapid packaging of patients.
7. Provide frequent progress report to Command.
8. Ensure safety and accountability of all patients and assigned personnel.
9. Verify transportation priorities with Transportation Sector.
10. Coordinate with other sectors.
11. Notify Command when all patients have been moved from the treatment area.
The Treatment Sector officer will wear a sector vest for identification purposes.
The Sector officers should determine together with Command whether patients would be treated “in place”
or treated at a specific treatment area.
If treatment will occur “in place,” companies should be directed by the Treatment Sector officer to specific
patient or vehicle (e.g., “E20, you have the patients in the red sedan. R17 will assist.”). The goal will be to
assign one ALS or BLS company and one Rescue to each patient, resources permitting. Crews should
initially focus their effort on treating and transporting IMMEDIATE patients. These patients can easily be
spotted with night-reflective IMMEDIATE labels placed on or near their bodies by the triage team(s).
Treatment teams should communicate with Command to obtain additional Rescues.
If patient treatment will occur in a designated “treatment area”, then the Treatment Sector officer should
establish a treatment area and prepare for the arrival of patients from Extrication. The treatment entry point
should be readily identified (e.g. traffic cones) and have personnel to direct arriving patients. The treatment
area must be in a readily accessible location for patient entry and transportation loading but away from any
dangerous conditions associated with the incident.
The treatment area should be large enough to absorb all patients and the large numbers of treatment
personnel-THINK BIG! This area should be located in a safe area with consideration given to allow for easy
access by rescues or ambulances. If the incident is large enough, Treatment should designate separate
"IMMEDIATE" and "DELAYED" treatment areas.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

TREATMENT SECTOR
M.P. 203.04

03/00-R

Page 2 of 3

The treatment area(s) should have a readily identifiable entrance using traffic cones, signs or other
markers. Red and yellow salvage covers can also be used to identify the IMMEDIATE care and DELAYED
care areas, for IMMEDIATE and DELAYED patients, respectively. One salvage cover provides ample
working room for up to three patients.
If the incident scene is very large, it may be necessary to establish more than one treatment area in
different locations. Branch operations may be required to coordinate these efforts. Geographic
designations (i.e., “East Treatment”, “West Treatment”) should be utilized (“Transportation Branch, Multiple
Site Coordination”).
Treatment shall advise Command when ready to receive patients.
Of all the sectors, the Treatment Sector typically requires the heaviest commitment of personnel. During
major incidents, one company per four (4) patients should be the initial objective (one rescuer per patient).
As resources permit, the overall goal is to provide all the resources necessary to treat all the patients.
Treatment should assign personnel to meet and direct first arriving litter-bearers on the placement of
patients in "IMMEDIATE” and "DELAYED" Areas. Patients in the treatment area should be arranged in an
orderly manner with adequate space provided between patients to allow working room for treatment
personnel. First arriving patients should be placed near the exit point. Rescuers should first fill from exit
towards the entrance as patients are delivered to treatment. This will eliminate personnel from having to
step over or move around patients as they are delivered or transported.
Non-triaged patients arriving at the treatment area must be triaged and tagged at the entrance. A triage
team should be located at the entrance for this purpose. As these new patients are tagged, the Treatment
Sector officer should forward a “Triage Update” to Command to include these newly-discovered patients.
Treatment personnel must continue to assess all patients for changes in conditions, through an ongoing
basis to maintain appropriate triage classifications. Once initial triage activities have been completed, triage
teams can be reassigned to Treatment to continuously re-evaluate patients. ALS treatment will be given
primarily in the "IMMEDIATE" treatment area. Less intensive patient monitoring and treatment will be given
to the "DELAYED" treatment area with mostly BLS personnel assigned to this area. Medical information
(vital signs, injuries, treatment rendered) should be documented on the appropriate side of the triage tag.
A variety of ALS personnel, BLS personnel, medical staff and others may be assigned to the Treatment
Sector. The Treatment Sector officer must have specific assignments for these varied personnel. Non-fire
department medical personnel should be closely supervised by the Treatment Sector officer or others.
Command staff, branch directors and Sector officers will have full supervisory authority over this staff.
If the condition of a patient changes significantly (better or worse) it may be necessary to transfer the
patient to a higher or lower priority area. The Treatment Sector officer should be advised. Once all
IMMEDIATE patients have been treated, DELAYED patients who have significant mechanism of injury
should be reevaluated and upgraded to IMMEDIATE as necessary.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

TREATMENT SECTOR
M.P. 203.04

03/00-R

Page 3 of 3

The Treatment Sector must cause aggressive treatment and packaging of patients with an emphasis on
rapid transport. The Treatment Sector officer must maintain an immediate awareness of which patients are
ready for transport. The Sector officer must ensure treatment is rapid, adequate, and appropriate numbers
of treatment personnel are assigned to each patient. The only time extended treatment should be
considered is when immediate transportation is not available. Close coordination with the Transportation
Sector officer must be maintained to ensure rapid transportation.
When transportation is immediately available, transportation of the patient becomes a priority over
extended on-site treatment. Rapid transportation is of the essence.
The Treatment Sector officer will consult with the Transportation Sector on the allocation of patients to
various medical facilities.
The Treatment Sector officer should forward progress reports and triage updates to Command as needed.
The Treatment Sector officer is responsible for determining the need for additional medical supplies at the
scene and should request their delivery through Command. A Medical Supply Sector will automatically
occur on all 3-A-M incidents. This sector should be established near the treatment area (“Medical Supply
Sector”).

