Policy Name:

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES
Policy Number:
CAR FIRES
M.P. 202.16

This policy is for internal use only and does not expand an employee’s legal duty or civil
liability in any way. This policy should not be construed as creating a duty to act or a higher
duty of care, with respect to third party civil claims against employees or the Phoenix Fire
Department (PFD). Remedies for violations of this policy, if proven, are limited to
administrative disciplinary action against PFD employees.
Related Policies: 205.20, 205.20A, 202.19, 202.19A
Other Reference: NFPA - Emergency Response Guides for Alternative Fuel Vehicles, IAFC's
Fire Department Response to Electric Vehicle Fires Bulletin
Date Implemented: 04/2023-R
Review Date: 04/2028
PURPOSE
The purpose of this procedure is to identify operational tactics and considerations for motor
vehicle fires. As sales of electric and hybrid vehicles increase, fire departments must continue to
modify our tactics to address evolving safety and tactical considerations.
OVERVIEW
There is no such thing as a standard vehicle fire. The innovation and design of motor vehicles
today has created many different hazards for firefighters. Early recognition of the involvement of
an Electric Vehicle (EV), Hybrid Vehicle (HV) Vehicle with Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG), Compressed
Natural Gas (CNG) and emerging technologies such as Hydrogen powered vehicles. Autonomous
Driving vehicles represent special risks associated with this emerging technology. This
information is critical to size up and initial decision making on the incident. This information
should be gathered by AHQ if possible. Crews must complete a size-up and attempt to identify the
type of vehicle they are dealing with. Responding crews should rely on visual signs to include
vehicle markings, color of smoke, location of smoke and/or fire, and any other signs that signal a
crew to be aware of the products involved. Remember to consider the following important steps
for all vehicle fires:
1. Identify the vehicle type and address life safety.
2. Address scene safety, apparatus placement and tactical positioning, immobilize the vehicle,
when possible, chock wheels, etc.
3. Disable the vehicle, turnoff ignition, operate emergency shutoff if equipped, remove key or
fab, consider addressing the factory labeled cable cut points.
The minimum level of protection for firefighters is full protective clothing breathing air from their
SCBA. Captains must wear full protective clothing to directly supervise crews.
CAR FIRES
Page 1 of 6

APPARATUS PLACEMENT
Apparatus should be placed upwind and uphill of the incident if possible. This is to afford
protection from hazardous liquids and vapors and reduces smoke in the work area. Position the
apparatus to protect the scene from on-coming traffic, using the apparatus as a barrier, to shield
the incident scene from traffic hazards. Warning lights should be left operating, in conjunction
with the use of traffic cones where needed. The use of flares by fire and police should be used
with caution; consider the potential for flammable liquids and vapors. Additional consideration
should be given to positioning the apparatus at an angle to better allow the removal of any hose
from the preconnected cross-lay compartments.
WATER SUPPLY/EXTINGUISHMENT
Except in the case of a large fuel fire, water is the best for extinguishment of motor vehicle fires,
however if not immediately available dry chemicals, CO2, foam, or another typical extinguishing
agent should be considered. If an EV/HV has been identified and is on fire, large amounts of water
will be required to cool the batteries if the batteries catch fire, are exposed to high heat, or is
generating heat or gases. It can take 3,000 gallons or more of water applied to the battery to fully
extinguish AND cool down the batteries. This will require an uninterrupted water supply.
FIRE ATTACK
The minimum size of hose line to initiate an attack on a vehicle fire is the 1 ¾ inch handline.
Approach the vehicle with full PPE and SCBA with facepiece, initiate the fire attack from a 45degree angle, utilizing the reach of the fire stream to begin to extinguish the fire. First water should
be applied to extinguish or protect the passenger compartment and an all clear should be
obtained. Wheel chocks should be applied to prevent the vehicle from rolling. Hand tools can
assist in providing access into vehicle spaces.
GENERAL HAZARDS AND SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS
• Energy absorbing bumpers consist of gas and fluid filled cylinders that when heated during
a fire, will develop high pressures which may result in the sudden release of the bumper
assembly. This could result in serious injury to anyone in its path. Bumper assemblies have
been known to travel 25 feet.
• Batteries have Explosion/Flammability/Toxicity and Electrical shock hazards. Avoid contact
with battery components.
• Trunk rear hatch, engine hoods, etc., have hold-open devices that may employ, along or in
any combination with any of the following: springs, gas cylinders, extending arms, etc.
When gas cylinders are exposed to heat, failure or rupture of these devices should be
expected. Excessive pressure may develop in lift assists causing a trunk, hatch, or hood to
fly open with explosive force when the latch mechanism is released. To ensure personal
safety, be sure to allow sufficient clearance when releasing latches.
• Fires involving the trunk/cargo area should be approached with extreme caution. Contents
may include toxic, flammable, or other hazardous materials. Expect the worst!
CAR FIRES
Page 2 of 6

•

•

•

Fuel tanks may be constructed of sheet metal or plastic. A rupture or burn-through may
occur with these tanks causing a rapid flash fire of the fuel. Do not remove gas cap, as tank
may have become pressurized. Do not direct hose stream into tank, as this will cause
pressurization of tank, with a possible result of burning fuel spewing from the tank fill
opening.
Well-sealed interiors of modern vehicles present the potential for vent-limited fire on the
interior which may grow significantly when fresh air is introduced during suppression. Use
caution when opening doors or breaking windows. Appropriate approach, ventilation, and
safety concerns must be considered. Have a charged handline ready before making entry.
At least one member of the attack team must have forcible entry tools in his/her possession
to provide prompt, and safe entry into the vehicle.
Vehicle stability tires or split rims exposed to fire may explode, causing the vehicle to drop
suddenly. Expect exploding rim parts or tire debris to be expelled outward from the sides.
Approach from the front or rear of the vehicle for maximum protection from potential flying
debris. Some larger vehicles, such as buses, employ an air suspension system. When these
systems are exposed to heat or flame, they may fail, causing the vehicle to SUDDENLY
drop several inches.

Where patients are trapped in the vehicle, first water should be applied to protect the patients and
permit rescue. When rescue is not a factor, first water should be applied for several seconds to
extinguish fire or cool down the area around any fuel tanks or fuel systems. This is especially
important if the fuel tanks are LPG or CNG.
LPG & CNG
LPG and CNG are used as fuel for vehicles. Pressure release devices can create a lengthy "blow
torch" effect, or should the pressure relief device fail, a BLEVE may occur. Vehicles may not be
marked to identify this fuel hazard. If there is flame impingement on a visible LPG/CNG storage
tank, take action to control the fire and cool the tank. Operate emergency shutoff controls to stop
the flow of gas from the storage tank. If vapors escaping from the storage tank relief valve have
ignited, allow the LPG/CNG to burn while protecting exposures and cooling the tank. Flow of gas
through piping can be controlled by shutting off the valve at the storage tank. Balance to a 2 & 1
hazardous assignment.
ELECTRIC & HYBRID VEHICLES
When arriving on scene, the first step is proper size up. This includes the extent of the fire and if
it’s a compartment fire or includes the electrical components of the vehicle. Once life safety has
been addressed, fire companies should determine if they should suppress the fire or simply allow
the vehicle to burn. This can be based on exposures, the extent of the fire, etc. EVs can be viewed
as a battery energy storage system on wheels. Batteries are simply a method to store energy and
once the batteries have gone into thermal runaway, we understand that the vehicle is most likely

CAR FIRES
Page 3 of 6

a total loss. Control efforts must consider life safety, property conservation, exposure protection,
environmental protection, and firefighter safety.
EV fires pose additional hazards to firefighters due to the battery systems. When the decision is
made to control the fire, the best method for controlling a battery fire is with water. Battery fires
will initially show from under the vehicle where the batteries are located.
1. Protect the working area and position apparatus, accordingly, wear full PPE with SCBA and
facepiece, ensure the EV is in park and off when possible.
2. Balance the assignment to a 3-1 Hazardous Materials assignment.
3. Secure a water supply.
4. Chock the wheels. EVs move silently, so never assume the power is off and never assume
the EV will not move.
5. Small fires that do not involve the high voltage batteries can be extinguished using typical
firefighting methods.
6. For well involved EVs, remember once the interior, contents, etc., are extinguished,
sustained suppression on the battery pack may be necessary. Use 1 3/4-inch hand lines to
suppress and cool fire and battery. Put water on burning surfaces. The use of AFFF is
contraindicated. The use of Class A foam reduces the cooling effect of water in this
application.
a. Attack an EV fire at a 45-degree angle initiating attack from 40 feet away and move
forward. Batteries may vent below the vehicle's rocker panels and exhaust out the
sides of vehicles.
7. Do not cut into or puncture the battery pack.
8. When necessary, efforts to protect dry-wells and storm drains through diversion and diking
should be used. Protect exposures and evacuate the area.
9. EV batteries shall always be considered energized.
10. Recognize off gassing as a sign of continued battery degradation. This visible vapor cloud
is toxic and flammable. It may appear as a white smoke even post extinguishment.
General Awareness & Safety Concerns
The high voltage battery system is controlled through the low voltage battery system. It is
important to disable both systems when possible. Locating and cutting the negative terminal on
the low voltage side is necessary to potentially disable the system. It is important to note that it
may take up to 10 minutes for some electrical capacitors to fully discharge. The batteries will
retain stranded energy and will continue to pose an electrical hazard.
Hybrid vehicles will have lithium batteries and another fuel source. You will have hazards of high
voltage battery systems and the other fuel. If during fire attack with water, the fire does not go
out. Consider the use of dry chemical extinguishers for initial suppression.

CAR FIRES
Page 4 of 6

If vehicle is extinguished check temperatures of battery locations with TIC or temp gun, it is
important to understand that you are looking at the casing around the battery with your tool. It is
more critical to document trending temperatures to indicate if heat is building or if the heat is
decreasing. Reignition potential is indicated by temps increasing. An increase in temperature will
indicate the potential for a secondary fire. If the batteries have suffered thermal or mechanical
insult the potential for electrocution is present, limit contact to the vehicle. Electric vehicles
involved in fire should have a stable or reducing temperature for at least one hour before turning
the car over to a tow company. Reignition may occur.
The use of a thermal blanket may be considered to create a fire stop and isolate the burning
vehicle’s ability to extend. The thermal blanket does not stop the thermal runaway process.
Without a life hazard or an exposure, the IAP may allow us to let the vehicle burn or just battery
pack burn and treat the vehicle shell as an exposure. This may limit the total amount of smoke
produced.
Hazard mitigation on EV fires is a collaborative process. The NFPA actively maintains a collection
of Emergency Response Guides from vehicle manufactures. To access these documents, use the
link below:
NFPA - Emergency Response Guides for Alternative Fuel Vehicles
Post EV/HV Incident Considerations
The general guidance provided to towing companies and storage facilities is to provide a 50-foot
clear space around the EV once stored and never inside a building.
Consider briefing towing companies on this and escorting them to the vehicle storage location.
Remember, thermal events with the battery system can continue for some time after the initial
incident.
FIRES INVOLVING ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
Fires involving EV charging stations should be treated as a fire involving any other electrical
equipment:
• Secure Power to the EV Chargers.
• Once power is secured, the fire can be extinguished.
VEHICLES IN PARKING GARAGE
Any vehicle fire in a parking garage poses unique challenges. Upgrade the assignment to a 3 & 1.
This will provide additional resources. A thorough size-up of incident factors must be performed.
Some example considerations are:
• What level is the vehicle on?
CAR FIRES
Page 5 of 6

•
•
•
•
•

Is this an above ground or below grade?
What exposures are attached to the garage?
Is there a life hazard in the exposed areas?
Where is the smoke traveling?
Although non-combustible, the concrete structure can be weakened by extended exposure
to the heat of a fire.

Supporting the sprinkler system is a high priority to limit fire spread. Many modern midrise
buildings have a combination system that supports the sprinklers and the standpipe from one
system. These buildings often have no fire pump, and the system is charged with municipal
pressure. Pumping the FDC increases the GPM flow and pressure for both the sprinklers and the
attack line.
When the incident has concluded, we should not be leaving the incident with building fire
protection systems inoperable, rendering the building unprotected (please see M.P. 202.19 and
202.19A and/or your departments specific policies and adopted fire code regulations).
Controlling the ventilation system will aid in the protection of occupants of the parking garage and
the exposures. A size up of the smoke travel/spread must be performed. If the garage is attached
to an occupied structure, command must evaluate smoke spread and evacuate occupants from
the affected areas. This will limit the exposure to toxic smoke.
Ladder companies may be used as an improvised standpipe at incidents on elevated freeways or
parking garages.

CAR FIRES
Page 6 of 6

