PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Safe Parking While Operating in or Near Vehicle Traffic
M.P. 205.07A

04/18

Page 1 of 6

Purpose
This procedure identifies parking practices for Fire Department apparatus that will provide
maximum protection and safety for personnel operating in or near moving vehicle traffic. It also
identifies several approaches for individual practices to keep firefighters safe while exposed to
vehicle traffic.
It shall be the policy of the Regional Fire Department to position apparatus at the scene of
emergences in a manner that best protects the work area and personnel from vehicle traffic
and other hazards.
All personnel should understand and appreciate the high risk that firefighters are exposed to
when operating in or near moving vehicle traffic. We should always operate from a defensive
posture. Always consider moving vehicles as a threat to your safety. Each day, emergency
personnel are exposed to motorists of varying abilities, with or without licenses, with or
without legal restrictions, and driving at speeds from creeping to well beyond the speed limit.
Some of these motorists could be the vision impaired, or alcohol and/or drug impaired. On top
of everything else, motorists will often be looking at the scene and not the road.
Nighttime operations are particularly hazardous. Visibility is reduced, and the flashing of
emergency lights tend to confuse motorists. Studies have shown that multiple headlights of
emergency apparatus (coming from different angles at the scene) tend to blind drivers as they
approach.
Safety Benchmarks
Emergency personnel are at great risk while operating in or around moving traffic. There are
approaches that can be taken to protect yourself and all crewmembers:
 Never trust the traffic
 Engage in proper protective parking
 Always wear high visibility reflective vests
 Reduce motorist vision impairment
 Use traffic cones and flares
Listed below are benchmarks for safe performance when operating in or near moving vehicle
traffic.
 Always maintain an acute awareness of the high risk of working in or around moving
traffic. Never trust moving traffic. Always look before you step! Always keep an eye on
the traffic!

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Safe Parking While Operating in or Near Vehicle Traffic
M.P. 205.07A

04/18

Page 2 of 6

 Always position apparatus to protect the scene, patients, emergency personnel, and
provide a protected work area. Where possible, angle apparatus at 45 degrees away
from curbside. This will direct motorist around the scene (See Figure 1). Apparatus
positioning must also allow for adequate parking space for other fire apparatus (if
needed), and a safe work area for emergency personnel. Allow enough distance to
prevent a moving vehicle from knocking fire apparatus into the work areas.
 At intersections, or where the incident may be near the middle of the street, two or
more sides of the incident may need to be protected. Block all exposed sides. Where
apparatus is in limited numbers, prioritize the blocking from the most critical to the least
critical (See Figures 2, 3 and 4).
 For first arriving engine companies, where a charged hoseline may be needed, angle the
engine so that the pump panel is "downstream," on the opposite side of on‐coming
traffic. This will protect the pump operator (See Figure 5).
 The initial company officer (or Command) must assess the parking needs of later‐
arriving fire apparatus and specifically direct the parking and placement of these
vehicles as they arrive to provide protective blocking of the scene. This officer must
operate as an initial safety officer.
 During daytime operations, leave all emergency lights on to provide warning to drivers.
 For NIGHTTIME operations, turn OFF fire apparatus headlights. This will help reduce the
blinding effect to approaching vehicle traffic. Other emergency lighting should be
reduced to yellow lights and emergency flashers where possible.
 Crews should exit the curb side or non‐traffic side of the vehicle whenever possible.
 Always look before stepping out of apparatus, or into any traffic areas. When walking
around fire apparatus parked adjacent to moving traffic, keep an eye on traffic and walk
as close to fire apparatus as possible.
 Always wear a safety vest any time you are operating in or near vehicle traffic.
 When parking apparatus to protect the scene, be sure to protect the work area also. The
area must be protected so that patients can be extricated, treated, moved about the
scene and loaded into Rescues safely.
 Once enough fire apparatus have "blocked" the scene, park or stage unneeded vehicles
off the street whenever possible. Bring in Rescue/Ambulance companies one or two at a
time and park them in safe locations at the scene. This may be "downstream" from
other parked apparatus, or the Rescue may be backed at an angle into a protected
loading area to prevent working in or near passing traffic.
 At residential medical emergencies, park Rescue in driveways for safe loading where
possible. If driveways are inaccessible, park Rescue to best protect patient loading areas.
(See Figures 6 and 7).
 Place traffic cones at the scene to direct traffic. This should be initiated by the first
company arriving on the scene and expanded, if needed, as later arriving companies
arrive on the scene. Always place and retrieve cones while facing on‐coming traffic.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Safe Parking While Operating in or Near Vehicle Traffic
M.P. 205.07A

04/18

Page 3 of 6

 Placing flares, where safe to do so, adjacent to and in combination with traffic cones for
nighttime operations greatly enhances scene safety. Place flares to direct traffic where
safe and appropriate to do so. Listed below are general recommendations for the start
of traffic cones/flares:
Speed
25 mph
40 mph
60 mph

Distance
65 feet
105 feet
160 feet

 At major intersections, a call for police response may be necessary. Provide specific
direction to the police officer as to exactly what your traffic control needs are. Ensure
the police are parking to protect themselves and the scene. Position Rescues to protect
patient loading areas. (See Figure 8)
Freeway Operations
Freeway emergencies pose a particularly high risk to emergency personnel. Speeds are higher,
traffic volume is significant, and motorists have little opportunity to slow, stop or change lanes.
The Department of Public Safety will also have a desire to keep the freeway traffic flowing.
Where need be, the freeway can be completely shut down. This, however, rarely occurs.
For freeway emergencies, we will continue to block the scene with the first apparatus on the
scene to provide a safe work area. Other companies may be used to provide additional
protection if needed. The initial company officer, or command, must thoroughly assess the
need for apparatus on the freeway and their specific positions. Companies should be directed
to specific parking locations to protect the work area, patients and emergency personnel.
Other apparatus should be parked downstream when possible. This provides a safe parking
area.
Staging of Rescue companies off the freeway may be required. Rescues should be brought into
the scene one or two at a time. A safe loading area must be established.
Traffic cones should be placed farther apart, with the last cone approximately 160 feet
"upstream," to allow adequate warning to drivers. Place and retrieve cones while facing the
traffic.
Command should establish a liaison with the Department of Public Safety as soon as possible to
jointly provide a safe parking and work area and to quickly resolve the incident. The
termination of the incident must be managed with the same aggressiveness as initial actions.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Safe Parking While Operating in or Near Vehicle Traffic
M.P. 205.07A

04/18

Page 4 of 6

Crews, apparatus, and equipment must be removed from the freeway promptly to reduce
exposure to moving traffic.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Safe Parking While Operating in or Near Vehicle Traffic
M.P. 205.07A

04/18

Page 5 of 6

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Safe Parking While Operating in or Near Vehicle Traffic
M.P. 205.07A

04/18

Page 6 of 6

