Page |1

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

NATURAL GAS EMERGENCIES

M.P. 204.05

05/21

Page 1 of 6

The Phoenix Regional Automatic Aid System responds to thousands of incidents each
year that involve natural gas. We must remain cognizant of the hazards associated with
gas emergencies, the need to meter, control gas leaks and evacuate those threatened.
Most important of all, we must remain vigilant and prevent complacency.
Natural gas (Methane) is extremely flammable, lighter than air, is colorless and
odorless. Due to these characteristics, Mercaptan is added to natural gas to help indicate
its presence and will result in an odor like rotten eggs. The flammable range of natural
gas is 4 percent Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) to 15 percent Upper Explosive Limit (UEL) by
volume. Although natural gas is non-toxic, it can displace oxygen, which can
cause asphyxiation in certain settings. The presence of natural gas in its flammable
range can be evaluated with the use of a Combustible Gas Indicator. This is
done by the Hazardous Materials Response Teams (HMRT) and/or the appropriate utility
company.
Fires involving natural gas should be controlled by stopping the flow of gas. In most
cases, burning natural gas should not be extinguished as this would change the situation
from a visible to an invisible hazard with an explosive potential. Because natural gas is
lighter than air, if confined it has the potential for a catastrophic explosion. Natural gas
leaks above ground are much easier to manage than below ground leaks.
PROCEDURE
Fire Department units may encounter natural gas in a variety of situations and incident
types, each presenting a unique set of hazards. These incidents can range from a simple
check odor to potential major incidents involving natural gas explosions. The following
guidelines present an approach which will be applicable in many situations, but do not
replace good judgment and experience when dealing with any incident. Incidents
involving natural gas should be managed using the risk management profile and
strategic decision-making model (M.P. 201.01C).
PERSONNEL SAFETY
Per M.P. 202.05B, all personnel working in the vicinity of a potential explosion or fire
area, including gas leaks and fuel spills, shall wear full protective clothing with SCBA,
face piece donned and breathing air. A Hot Zone shall be established and defined by
"fire line" tape. Personnel working in the hot zone, (e.g. attempting to secure a gas leak),
shall be protected by a hose line. The number of exposed personnel will be kept to a
minimum while still assuring crew accountability and a minimum of two personnel.

Page |2

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

NATURAL GAS EMERGENCIES

M.P. 204.05

05/21

Page 2 of 6

ACTIONS OF THE FIRST ARRIVING FIRE DEPARTMENT UNIT (NON HAZ-MAT)
• Perform a scene size up and establish Command. Consciously avoid committing
apparatus or personnel to a dangerous situation or a situation that could become
dangerous due to gas migration.
• Attempt to locate the homeowner or other RP and begin to gather information as
to the hazard, potential victims, etc.
• Evacuate the area, working towards an “All Clear” of the immediate area and
surrounding structures if necessary.
• Isolate the area/scene – Establishment of a “Hot Zone” is critical.
• Deny entry.
• If incident is determined to be a natural gas leak, ensure that personnel safety
practices are in place when working in the Hot Zone including the wearing of the
appropriate PPE with SCBA, face piece donned and breathing air. Establish a
water supply and ensure that a charged hose line is in place. This line must be
attended when Haz-Mat crews or gas company personnel are securing the leak.
ACTIONS OF THE FIRST ARRIVING HAZ-MAT UNIT
• First arriving Hazardous Materials Response Team should be assigned Hazard
Sector
• Ensure that firefighter safety practices are in place when working in the Hot Zone,
including
wearing
the
appropriate
PPE
with
SCBA
face
piece
donned and breathing air.
• Ensure that a charged hose line is in place and manned when Haz-Mat crews or
gas company personnel are securing the leak.
• Contact initial crews, the RP, and gas company personnel (if on scene) to gather
information about the hazard.
• Reevaluate the initial Hot Zone using metering devices, including Combustible
Gas
Indicators (CGI), and adjust the
boundaries as necessary
based
upon the situation and meter readings.
• Gather necessary tools and equipment needed to mitigate the hazard.
• In situations where gas company personnel are needed to assist with the
mitigation efforts, ensure that they are dressed in the appropriate PPE including
SCBA’s.
INCIDENTS INVOLVING A REPORTED GAS LEAK - NO FIRE OR EXPLOSION
Calls for "odor of gas," "gas leak," "broken gas line" and similar situations may range
from minor to major incidents. Each of these scenarios should be approached as

Page |3

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

NATURAL GAS EMERGENCIES

M.P. 204.05

05/21

Page 3 of 6

potentially dangerous situations. Although there is not a visible hazard, fire or explosion,
the situation can change instantly. Uncontrolled flammable gas leaks should never be
approached with a “routine” mindset. Safe and effective operations necessitate
appropriate size up, approach, establishing and controlling the perimeter, and hazard
mitigation.
In all cases, Fire Department units shall take appropriate actions, using the Risk
Management Profile (M.P.201.01c) to provide for life safety and property conservation.
If gas company personnel are on the scene of an incident prior to arrival of fire crews, the
best practice is for the first arriving Fire Department unit to make contact with the onscene gas company and determine needs. Gas company personnel shall be responsible
for locating and eliminating the source of the leak. Gas company personnel and/or the
Hazardous Materials Response Team shall obtain a sufficient number of gas
concentration readings, using various tools, including combustible gas indicators for
Command to evaluate the hazard and take appropriate action.
The Hazardous Materials Plan (M.P. 204.01) should be used as a basic guide for these
incidents. A minimum number of personnel should be allowed to enter the area to sizeup the situation while any additional unit’s stage outside the hazard zone, preferably up
wind of the incident.
In addition to evacuating, isolating, and denying entry, non-tech fire crews can attempt to
locate the source of the gas and any shutoff devices available.
•

If the location of the incident is a SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING and the source of
the leak can be identified it would be appropriate to secure the gas to the
appliance or meter if needed. Wait for the arrival of Haz-Mat crews if a source of
the leak cannot be located.

•

If the location of the incident is a COMMERCIAL OCCUPANCY OR OTHER LARGE
OCCUPANCY (e.g. large warehouses, hospitals, etc.) refrain from attempting to
secure the natural gas unless there is an immediate life hazard. Securing the gas
main is often difficult to accomplish due to the size and complexity of the
occupancy. Best practices should include evacuation, isolation, and the denial of
entry until Haz-Mat crews and/or gas company personnel arrive on scene.

Page |4

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

NATURAL GAS EMERGENCIES

M.P. 204.05
•

05/21

Page 4 of 6

If the location of the incident involves an APARTMENT COMPLEX, the best
practice is to try and determine the source of the leak. If you can isolate
the leak at an appliance, secure the source, (e.g. incoming gas line at the dryer or
stove). If the leak is at a bank of meters, best practices should include evacuation,
isolation, and the denial of entry until Haz-Mat crews arrive on scene.

Gas leak situations within a building where the source of the leak is unknown or
uncontrolled, the gas supply should be shut off at the meter. This should only be done in
coordination with on scene HazMat units, C957 or Gas Company representative.
If there is any indication of gas accumulating within a building, evacuate occupants from
the structure, isolate the area and deny re-entry and await the arrival of HazMat
units. Attempting to secure ignition sources, e.g. turning off power, can lead to an
explosion. If there is imminent life safety concern, use the appropriate actions
necessary following the Risk Management Plan (M.P.201.01c).
First arriving Hazardous Materials Response Team (HMRT) should be assigned
Hazard Sector and should initiate metering the area to re-evaluate the established Hot
Zone boundaries. Hazard Sector will assess their ability to mitigate the leak. At this
time Hazard sector should work with other utility companies to secure ignition sources
including electricity. Securing electricity may not take place onsite but at a remote
location. Hazard sector should consider ventilating the structure using natural ventilation
and/or intrinsically safe equipment if available. Battery operated equipment does not
necessarily mean intrinsically safe.
Hazard Sector should work with the gas company to obtain sufficient number of gas
concentration readings in the event the leak has not been identified. If gas company
personnel are actively securing the leak in the HOT ZONE, fire department crews
shall provide stand-by protection with a charged 1 ¾ hand line and minimum of two
firefighters in appropriate PPE with SCBA, face piece donned and breathing air.
Operating personnel should remain pessimistic in their approach to reported gas leaks
and should utilize HMRT crews and the utility company resources to rule out any
potential hazards.

Page |5

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

NATURAL GAS EMERGENCIES

M.P. 204.05

05/21

Page 5 of 6

INCIDENTS AT WHICH AN EXPLOSION OR FIRE HAS OCCURRED
Units arriving at the scene of a structural explosion must consider natural gas as a
possible cause and recognize the potential signs including a debris field, and/or structural
damage.
Explosions have occurred in structures which were not served by natural
gas. Underground leaks may migrate considerable distances before entering a structure
through the foundation, around pipes, or through void spaces. When natural gas
migrates in this manner, Mercaptan may be scrubbed as the gas travels underground
leaving the gas truly odorless. In these circumstances, the cause of the explosion may be
difficult to determine.
First arriving crew should perform the following:
1. Effective size up, recognize the signs of a gas explosion.
2. Determine the presence of victims, their condition, and triage.
3. Identify immediate hazards (e.g., collapse, leaking gas, fire, etc.).
4. Develop an incident action plan, consideration given to the need for rescue of
trapped occupants, structural collapse and/or integrity, treatment, fire control, etc.
Also, address accomplishment of an “All Clear” on involved structure and
surrounding structures (evacuation).
Until it can be determined that the area is safe from the danger of further explosions,
evacuate all civilians and keep the number of Fire Department and/or other emergency
personnel (e.g., gas company) in the area to the minimum number necessary to stabilize
the situation. Take a pessimistic point of view.
The Incident Commander must establish a Hazard Sector as soon as possible. Hazard
Sector should establish Hot, Warm, Cold, and No-Entry Zones as necessary. The Hot
Zone should include any areas where gas detection equipment identifies reading of 10 %
of the LEL (0.4% gas) or greater. If a gas concentration is encountered inside, adjacent to,
or underneath any building, secure all possible sources of ignition in the affected area.
HazMat crews will, in coordination with utility company personnel, secure electricity
from outside the affected area to avoid arcing if necessary. Before securing any potential
ignition source, evaluation and metering should take place. Hazard Sector should
consider ventilating the structure using natural ventilation and/or intrinsically safe
equipment if available. Battery operated equipment does not necessarily mean
intrinsically safe.

Page |6

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

NATURAL GAS EMERGENCIES

M.P. 204.05

05/21

Page 6 of 6

Use combustible gas indicators to systematically check all suspected areas. Start outside
of the area of the explosion and move into the area until readings indicate detectable
concentration. Both gas company personnel and the HMRT will establish warm and hot
zones.
The use of ground probes is essential to evaluate potential underground leaks. However,
in extraordinary circumstances, such as migration of gas in a sewer system, ground
probes may not be sufficient and other detection devices may be required. When gas
company personnel are on the scene, ground probe readings and locations must be
coordinated.
Command shall provide for effective interaction between gas company personnel and the
Fire Department. Gas company personnel are responsible for locating and eliminating
leaks in the gas system. As industry specialists, they can provide Command with
valuable assistance in the effective handling of these incidents. In all cases, C957 or
Haz Mat Company Officer, will be required to supervise during on-site operations.
Command must ensure the safety and stability of all involved structures. If further
collapse is possible and a life safety hazard exists, Technical Rescue Teams and other
specialty resources should be called to provide for structural stabilization. Additional
appropriate resources should be requested as needed. (e.g., C99 should be
dispatched and structural engineers requested if necessary).

