PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

MEDICAL SAFETY OFFICER
M.P. 203.06A

10/04-N

Page 1 of 2

Purpose
The position of the Medical Safety Officer (MSO) would place a licensed medical practitioner as part of
the strategic level to enhance the medical wellness issues associated with our workforce. The MSO
would be assigned to work for the Safety Section.
MSO’s would be better positioned to provide the Command Team with strategic information related to
triage, treatment, and transportation of our firefighters to specialty hospitals and state-of-the-art
practices. This would decrease processing time for our firefighters’ as prearrangement for direct
admission would be in place.
This position would also enhance the Command Team at multiple-casualty WMD incidents with regard
to customer health issues and appropriate triage.
The information provided by the MSO would also benefit the PIO function with accurate information
from a licensed medical practitioner at the scene, as well as liaison work with outside agencies that
have statutory responsibilities on these types of events.
With on-scene coordination, our firefighters would benefit with follow-through and follow-up care from
the hospital back through the Health Center.
Objective
The MSO would respond to specialty alarms, multi-alarms, and long-term campaign events. The MSO
would be tasked through the Safety Section and work in the Rehab Sector. The MSO would be
partnered with a Command Officer to complete all tasks. This in turn would assist the Command Team
in working through the strategic/tactical priorities of rapidly escalating incidents.
Functions
Provide Command with clinical level information to enhance decisions concerning firefighter
medical safety at a strategic/tactical level.
Provide firefighters with real-time monitoring (instruments) by modifying work/rest cycles.
Medical Safety Officer (MSO) would function as a Medical SO (Support Officer) assigned to the
Safety Section to clinically direct medical treatment, triage, and release of firefighter at the
scene.
Medical Safety Officer (MSO) if needed would function as a Medial Triage Officer at multiplecasualty, WMD incidents, assigned to the Operations Section.
Would act as coordinator/controller for the specialty hospital care through Occupational Health
with Banner Poison Control Center, as well as Health Center follow through.
Requirements
Physician/Licensed Medical Professional functional with firefighter occupational medicine and
ACLS protocol, local medical specialties location.
Demonstrate knowledge, skills need to work within ICS through simulation at the Command
Training Center (CTC).

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

MEDICAL SAFETY OFFICER
M.P. 203.06A

10/04-N

Page 2 of 2

Demonstrate basic radio order model protocols.
Demonstrate knowledge of start system through drills, simulation.
Equipment
Text Pager
Identification vest /PPE
Laptop for on-scene access to medical records
Radio/cellular phone
Staff vehicle
Associated medical equipment
Deployment
This position would deploy to multi-alarms/multi-hazard/WMD incidents through automatic dispatch or
by request from Command.
Behavioral Outcomes
The Medical Safety Officer operating on the emergency scene, as part of the Command Team will offer
consistency in decisions related to firefighter wellness:
Decrease risk factor for ff deaths related to cardiac emergencies while operating on the
emergency scene.
Decrease risk factor for serious heat related injuries for firefighters with a more positive outcome
for recovery and loss time.
Decrease the lost time for firefighter in relation to industrial injuries with the highest level of
triage, management, and early intervention at the scene of injury.
Quick identification of trends in relation to civilian (or firefighter) illness during suspected mass
casualty incidents in relation to the use of Nuclear, Biological, or Chemical agents.
Provides opportunity to gather consistent and valuable statistical information to be used for
better management decisions with an increased opportunity for successful grants and other
alternative funding avenues.

