PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

ASSISTING OTHER AGENCIES
M.P. 205.18

03/09-R

Page 1 of 2

PURPOSE
The purpose of this management procedure is to document fire department response when agencies
request assistance where hazardous materials, wastes, or substances may be present, e.g. search
warrants.
The Phoenix Fire Department Special Operations Section has available multiple specially trained air
scent dogs able to search disaster sites, urban settings, and rural areas for live victims that may be
trapped and/or missing. These dogs are assigned to Phoenix Fire Department Canine Search
Specialists and available to assist other agencies in locating missing non-violent adults and children.
A canine search specialist team for non USAR call outs will consist of two handlers, two canines, two
PFD members as support personnel familiar with safety procedures, mapping, GPS, compass, canine
search procedures, and sector operations, and a Phx PD or other sponsoring agency Liaision Officer.
DEFINITION
The term "agency/ies" includes, but is not limited to: The Phoenix Police Department, The Maricopa
County Sheriff’s Department, Arizona Department of Environmental Quality, the State of Arizona
Attorney General's Office, and any other law enforcement agency.
POLICY
It is the policy of the Phoenix Fire Department to provide limited support to other agencies, when
requested, at sites of search warrants and searches for missing/lost non violent persons. Support may
consist of, but is not limited to: code enforcement, providing research and information on specific
hazardous material, and decontamination of entry personnel. At no time will any Phoenix Fire
Department canine search specialist teams and support personnel be used to conduct search
operations involving criminal or violent subjects.
REQUEST FOR ASSISTANCE FROM URBAN SERVICES/TRT UNITS
Any agency requesting assistance from on-duty Special Operations personnel and/or the TRT units
shall contact the Dispatch Supervisor at (602)262-7496.
A pre-incident meeting shall be scheduled between the requesting agency and the Special Operations
Duty Officer. The agency that is requesting the assistance shall provide information on location(s),
time(s), staging area(s), type(s) of products that may be involved, and the type of assistance that is
needed. Based upon the information disseminated, the Special Operations Duty Officer may elect to
have TRT units respond as a precautionary measure. Security of information will be strictly adhered to.
The Special Operations Chief, Shift Commander and Battalion Chief shall be notified. The Special
Operations Duty Officer will initiate such notification. Security of information will be strictly adhered to.
The Special Operations Duty Officer may elect to have the on-duty Fire Prevention Specialist respond
to the site for documentation purposes.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

ASSISTING OTHER AGENCIES
M.P. 205.18

03/09-R

Page 2 of 2

REQUEST FOR ASSISTANCE FROM URBAN SERVICES/CANINE SEARCH SPECIALIST TEAMS
Any agency requesting assistance from Special Operations canine search specialist teams shall
contact the Dispatch Supervisor at (602)262-7496. Call out by the Dispatch Supervisor will be made
through the on duty Special Operations Chief.
DISPATCH ROOM NOTIFICATION
When deemed appropriate, the on-duty Fire Prevention Specialist or the Special Operations Duty
Officer may notify Dispatch via telephone of the Agency request for assistance. An active incident
number will be requested when Operations personnel or equipment are required at the site. The
dispatch shall be "Assist Agency".
HEALTH AND SAFETY
No personnel shall enter a hazardous material, waste, or substance area without appropriate protective
clothing and equipment.
Personnel showing any signs or symptoms of a chemical exposure during or after the administration of
a search warrant shall be transported to Banner Good Samaratain, providing that the exposure is not a
critical life threatening emergency. Critical life threatening injuries require transport to the closest
appropriate hospital. All potentially exposed personnel and equipment shall be decontaminated. All
potentially exposed fire department personnel shall complete a Hazardous Materials Exposure Report
Form. Exposed equipment, especially protective clothing, may have to be properly disposed of.
Notification of Health and Fitness Deputy, Exposure Control Officer, and Safety Officer shall be made.
ENTRY
Phoenix Fire Department personnel will not participate in an entry operation unless:
(1) An emergency situation develops involving hazardous materials, wastes, or substances.
(2) The safety of the Phoenix Fire Department personnel is not jeopardized.
(3) A representative from the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality Emergency
Response Unit is present.
Phoenix Fire Department personnel shall not make entry into the search warrant site until the
appropriate law enforcement agency has deemed the site secured and "safe".
DOCUMENTATION
The on-duty Fire Prevention Specialist shall submit all reports generated as the result of the search
warrant to the appropriate law enforcement agency.

