PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

COMMUNITY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (CR UNITS)
M.P. 206.20

1/13-R

Page 1 of 2

CR units have three primary goals: 1) Meet the needs of our customers involved in traumatic situations; 2)
Follow-up on frequent flyer referrals and provide customized customer oriented solutions; 3) Provide
counseling services as needed to our members as a part of our firefighter wellness program.
The services consist of on-scene crisis intervention, occupant services, and short term crisis counseling.
The CR team(s) will also provide victim service information and social service referrals. The CR units have
phone numbers for counseling, hot lines, crisis services, and other available community resources
(including food boxes, utility assistance, and elderly assistance.)
Some of the services provided are:






Grief support
Crisis intervention (domestic violence, sexual assault victims)
Emotional support
Internal customer assistance
Transportation
o CR teams carry child car seats (3 per van)
o CR teams have access to a wheelchair van
 Care Bears, squencher, water, blankets, and coloring books.
The response hours are listed in CAD as CR1, CR12, CR16, and CR25. The CR1 supervisors are
available on-call 24/7 and can assist whenever CR1 unit is not in service. 602-370-5721
RESTRICTIONS:
Non-medical Transport
 CR vans will transport non-injured family or friend to the hospital to be with the injured person.
Transport
 No ETOH, where the subject is not alert and oriented x 4 or not in control of bodily functions or is
combative or suicidal. CR teams will go on-scene and will wait with the customer until C.C.,
Comtrans, P.D., a CRN response unit, family or other support system to arrive.
Mentally Ill
 CR vans will not transport a seriously mentally ill customer who is actively delusional or suicidal.
CR teams will go on-scene and will wait with the customer until Comtrans, P.D., a CRN response
unit, family member or other support system to arrive.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

COMMUNITY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (CR UNITS)
M.P. 206.20

1/13-R

Page 2 of 2

DISPATCH WITHIN CITY of PHOENIX
 CR teams are automatically dispatched on:
o Codes (adult and infant)
o Drowning (adult and child)
o 2nd alarm fires
o Major assaults
o Hangings
 CR teams also respond to:
o Domestic violence
o Simple assaults
o Sexual Assaults
o Death notification
o Working House Fires
o Occupant Services
o Suicides
o Mentally Ill
o Homeless
o Child and Elder abuse
o Lost children or elderly person
DISPATCH OUTSIDE THE CITY of PHOENIX
Phoenix CR teams will respond outside of the City of Phoenix when there is a special request from another
City’s police or fire personnel. (Examples: Member services issue or severe injury)
Phoenix CR teams will not respond outside the City of Phoenix on routine calls such as codes, fires,
homeless, or mentally ill, without prior approval from a CR Supervisor.

