PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

YOUTH FIRESETTERS INTERVENTION PROGRAM
M.P. 206.10

02/01-R

Page 1 of 4

DESCRIPTION OF PROGRAM
The Phoenix Fire Department’s Youth Firesetter Intervention Program has taken a positive approach in
its efforts to stop youth firesetting. A goal to stop firesetting in our community by youths has been
established. Assistance and support to the community is being offered. This is accomplished through
investigation, identification, assessment, evaluation, education, and appropriate referral to mental
health services described in the following M. P.
ENTRY INTO PROGRAM
Field Captain
If a youth firesetter is identified at the fire scene, the Field Captain can forward an electronic referral via
the fire intranet or complete a Youth Assistance Referral form 91-57D which should be carried on each
apparatus at all times. This form is then forwarded to the Youth Firesetter Intervention Program in
Urban Services. A follow-up letter will be returned to the referring person via email.
If evidence at the fire scene (witnesses, type of fire, etc.) indicates a youth started the fire, the Captain
must report this youth firesetter involvement on the Incident Encounter Form.
Station walk-ins
If a family comes to a fire station with their children who have been involved with firesetting, contact the
Youth Firesetter Intervention Program; office hours are from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday, phone 602-262-7757. If the situation appears to be a crisis, contact the Alarm Room for an
appropriate referral.
NOTE: TOURS OF THE FIRE STATION ARE INAPPROPRIATE AT THIS TIME. This tends to be
viewed by children as a reward for negative behavior of setting fires.
When to Call an Investigator
Fire Captains should call an investigator any time there is evidence of arson. If there are witnesses
and/or suspects at the scene with information that could identify the youth firesetter.
Also, request an investigator if the fire is of unknown origin or the cause cannot be determined. If the
fire was set intentionally and the child is 8 to 18 years old an investigator needs to be notified. A
referral to the Juvenile Court Center will be made if the youth is charged with a misdemeanor or felony.
The court will mandate the youth to the diversion program for first time offenses.This program consists
of two components: fire safety education and consequences of firesetting, along with seven sessions of
counseling. Youth charged with felony arson or repeat offenders will be referred to the Maricopa
County Attorney’s Office for prosecution.
When the investigator determines the fire was accidental due to curiosity, experimentation or
negligence and was not intentionally set, the youth is typically not referred to the Juvenile Court Center.
The investigator will make a referral to the Youth Firesetter Intervention Program and the family will
attend the Youth Fire Safety Class on a voluntary basis.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

YOUTH FIRESETTERS INTERVENTION PROGRAM
M.P. 206.10

02/01-R

Page 2 of 4

Family Referral
When a family is referred to the Youth Firesetter Intervention Program, a phone interview is conducted
to determine the severity of the problem. If the child is curious or experimenting with fire, a referral is
made to the Youth Fire Safety Class. In addition, if the problem seems to be a crisis situation, a
referral is made to a mental health professional. The family is sent an invitation to the Fire Safety Class
along with some information on fire safety.
INTERVENTION STRATEGIES
Youth Fire Safety Class
The class is held one Saturday or one Thursday night a month at a Phoenix Fire Department facility. A
Youth Firesetter Intervention Program team member instructs the class. The morning classes are held
from 9:00 a.m. to noon for children ages 3 through 7. The preschool class is for children 3, 4, and 5.
The 6 and 7-year-olds attend a separate class. Both morning classes teach fire safety behaviors.
The afternoon class is held from 1:00 to 4:00 p.m. for youth ages 8 through 12. This class addresses
the consequences of firesetting as well as responsibility issues incurred with firesetting. All classes are
available at no cost to the family and are voluntary. Parental attendance is strongly recommended.
The Thursday evening class is held from 6 to 9 p.m. for youths 8 through 17 years of age. The class
addresses the consequences of firesetting as well as the responsibilities incurred with firesetting. In
this class the students discuss Arizona Arson and Fireworks Laws, and the definitions for felony and
misdemeanor.
Counseling
If the family is experiencing a severe problem with firesetting, the caseworker will refer them to a mental
health professional. The counseling component consists of at least seven sessions. The provider will
work with the client to investigate existing insurance. If no mental health insurance is available through
the client, budgeted funds from the Phoenix Fire Department will be used. These visits are voluntary.
Diversion Program
When an investigator makes a referral to the Juvenile Court Center and the youth is charged with a
misdemeanor, he/she may be eligible for the diversion program for first time offenders. This program
consists of a three-hour class on the third Thursday of each month. A Youth Firesetter Intervention
Program team member teaches the class. The primary focus of the class is on consequences of
firesetting; i.e., life and property, misdemeanors, felonies and the effects on the fire service.

The youth is also referred to a mental health professional for at least seven sessions of counseling
mandated by the Juvenile Court Center. Both components must be completed for credit. Youths
charged with felony arson crimes and/or repeat offenders are not eligible for the diversion program and
will be referred to the Maricopa County Attorney’s Office for prosecution.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

YOUTH FIRESETTERS INTERVENTION PROGRAM
M.P. 206.10

02/01-R

Page 3 of 4

COMMUNITY SUPPORT
Community Advisory Panel
This group meets on a quarterly basis to discuss the problems of youth firesetting throughout the
community. Their main objective is to reduce firesetting and make other agencies aware of the
program. This group involves Child Protective Services, police, Juvenile Court Center, schools, mental
health providers, burn center representatives, insurance companies, etc.
Urban Survival
The Urban Survival curriculum is utilized in many schools throughout Phoenix. Often, the Community
Education Specialists (Fire Pals), along with school staff, have contact with firesetter’s. The curriculum
includes an explanation of firesetters and information for further assistance regarding entry into the
Youth Firesetter Intervention Program.
PROGRAM PARTICIPANT’S RESPONSIBILITIES
FIRE MARSHAL
Oversees all programs in the Division of Urban Services.
PROGRAM MANAGER
Manages all elements of the Youth Firesetter Intervention Program.
community. Seeks grants to fund the mental health component.

Is greatly involved with the

DEPUTY CHIEF - INVESTIGATIONS
Oversees referrals from Fire Investigators to the Youth Firesetter Intervention Program. Works with the
Program Manager to provide ongoing training.
DEPUTY CHIEF - COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT
Supervises all elements of the Youth Firesetter Intervention Program. Interacts with and supports the
Community Advisory Panel.
FIRE INVESTIGATOR
Responds to youth set fires when requested by a Fire Captain. Has the power to arrest if the fire was
set knowingly, with intent, and the youth is between the ages of 8-18; a referral will be made to the
Juvenile Court Center.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

YOUTH FIRESETTERS INTERVENTION PROGRAM
M.P. 206.10

02/01-R

Page 4 of 4

YOUTH FIRESETTER INSTRUCTOR
Trained personnel are responsible for teaching the scheduled Youth Firesetter Intervention classes
outlined in Section III, which include the Youth Fire Safety Class and Juvenile Court Center Diversion
Program. The Instructor attends training sessions, which include quarterly meetings, and seminars.
They are also involved in updating and improving ongoing Youth Firesetter Intervention Program
curriculum, new teaching techniques, and materials.
CASEWORKER
The caseworker receives and processes all referrals regarding juvenile firesetters. An intake form is
completed over the phone with the family to determine the severity of the problem. Referrals are then
made to an educational class and/or to a mental health professional for counseling. The caseworker
also works with the Public Education Specialist to update and improve Youth Firesetter Intervention
Program curriculum, new teaching techniques and materials.

