PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

FREEWAY RESPONSE
M.P. 205.15

12/98-R

Page 1 of 8

SCOPE
Freeway incidents commonly involve multiple vehicles, multiple patients, and often vehicle fires. A
major potential also exists for flammable liquid spills, fires or hazardous materials incidents.
This plan provides specific information and procedures to be used in handling incidents occurring on
the freeway system. Unless specifically superseded by this plan, all other Phoenix Fire Department
procedures shall be used in operations occurring on freeways.
DISPATCH INFORMATION
When dispatching an incident on a freeway, Dispatch will provide the following information:
1.
2.

3.

4.

Type of Incident
Location
a. Freeway or access frontage
b. I-17 or I-10 (Black Canyon or Maricopa), Papago I-10, SR-51
Squaw Peak, etc.
c. Cross street
Direction of Travel
a. If information indicates difficulty can be expected in reaching
or locating the scene, Dispatch will send a second company from
the opposite direction.
Traffic Conditions (if known)

RESPONSE
Dispatch may receive information on a freeway incident from the Department of Public Safety (D.P.S.)
or a variety of other sources. Communications must be established early and maintained with D.P.S. to
assure that needed information is exchanged regarding the incident.
In most cases, a freeway incident will be reported by the Arizona Department of Public Safety (D.P.S.).
Additionally, D.P.S. may arrive first at an incident and may be able to provide updated information on
traffic conditions and access. Any Information received from D.P.S. must be relayed immediately to
responding fire companies.
The Company Officer on a responding unit is responsible for redirecting other companies or having the
Dispatch Center send additional companies if it becomes apparent that the first company will be unable
to reach the incident due to traffic congestion. If access problems are anticipated, or if the direction of
travel is unknown, the Dispatch Center may send companies from opposite directions.
CANCELLED ENROUTE
When responding to freeway emergencies and D.P.S. is on-scene and has assumed command, it will
be the responsibility of the D.P.S. Command Officer to evaluate the following factors before canceling
any fire units.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

FREEWAY RESPONSE
M.P. 205.15

Auto Accident (962)
a. Mechanism of injury
b. Loss of consciousness h.
c. Slurred speech
d. Pregnant females
e. Ejected patients
f. Fractures

12/98-R

g.
h.
i.
j.
k.

Page 2 of 8

Neck pain
Paralysis of any type
Numbness
Chest pain
Other hazards: fuel,
unknown substances, etc.

If the D.P.S. Command Officer does not feel comfortable evaluating these medical triage decisions, the
officer will have the first due company respond for medical evaluation.
If fire units are canceled en-route, they should not proceed into the scene unless re-dispatched. This
creates unnecessary congestion and other traffic problems at the scene.
APPROACH AND STAGING
Units responding to calls on the Freeway will respond Code 2 while on the Freeway mainline.
However, alternating headlights and rear flashers may be used. Units should attempt to reach the
scene in the direction of the reported incident unless otherwise instructed by D.P.S.
In some cases, D.P.S. may advise the best access is via the access frontage or by traveling against the
normal traffic flow. Units should proceed in the opposite direction of normal flow only at the specific
request of D.P.S. when it is assured that all traffic has been stopped. Fire units should confirm traffic is
stopped before entering the freeway against traffic.
On multiple unit responses, the first unit approaching or entering the freeway within a mile of the
incident will report its identity, location and direction. Other units approaching will then stage Level I,
preferably near an on-ramp to avoid premature commitment to the mainline or access frontage. Where
appropriate to do so, these companies may block the access road to prevent additional traffic from
entering the freeway.
It is the responsibility of the first unit to direct other units via alternate access if unable to reach the
scene. Specific directions should be given regarding approach and direction for other companies when
problems are encountered.
COMMAND
The first unit arriving on the scene of a multiple unit incident will determine if the D.P.S. has established
a Command Post. If Incident Command is in place, the first arriving
fire department unit shall meet with the D.P.S. Incident Commander for a briefing. The following should
be covered:
1. Traffic Conditions
a. Stopped
b. One lane open
c. All lanes open

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

FREEWAY RESPONSE
M.P. 205.15

12/98-R

Page 3 of 8

2. Fire/No Fire (smoke showing, working fire, fully involved) A follow-up report should
indicate:
a. Number of patients/extent of injuries
b. Extrication Needed
c. Evacuation
d. Hazardous Materials Spill
e. What's Burning, including any hazardous product
3. Call for Necessary Help
a. Stage additional assistance as needed
COMMAND POST LOCATION
The Command Post location should be carefully chosen for major incidents to provide access and a
good view of the scene.
The access frontage or an overpass provides a view of the scene for incidents on depressed roadway
sections.
UNIFIED COMMAND
It's important to establish a single "Unified Command" Post as soon as possible. Key agencies at this
Command Post will be the fire department, the Arizona Department of Public Safety (DPS), the Arizona
Department of Transportation (ADOT), and if freeway traffic is being diverted to city streets, the
appropriate city police will need to be party to the Command Post operation.
It's important to physically assemble all representatives at a single location as soon as possible. This
may require the initial fire department commander to search out the DPS and ADOT representatives.
Once a physical location for the Command Post is determined, all agencies should advise their
dispatchers of that location.
Dispatch centers must be advised of any changes in the Command Post location (i.e. moving into the
fire department's Command Van and its physical location).
When the fire department is first to arrive, the Incident Commander must announce the command
vehicles identity (i.e. E14, Battalion 3) and the vehicle's location (i.e. 50 feet east of the accident).
Dispatch will relay the location to DPS. Dispatch must be advised of any change of Command Post
locations.
Use of the fire department sector vests and Command Officer vests will facilitate the Command
Operation and allow other agencies to find key persons at the incident.
LIAISON WITH DPS
In some occasions, particularly early in the incident, it may be more appropriate for a fire department
representative to serve as a liaison officer to the DPS Incident Commander. This liaison should be a
temporary function and should end when all agency representatives assemble Command Staff at a
unified Command Post.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

FREEWAY RESPONSE
M.P. 205.15

12/98-R

Page 4 of 8

When the need to shut down freeway traffic is indicated, Command must make a joint assessment of
conditions with the D.P.S. and police department. The logistical and traffic congestion problems
created by a complete shut down of freeway traffic may last for hours and affect a large area of the city.
A decision to close the freeway must recognize these factors in relation to the safety of the incident.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
Each company officer is responsible to research or know the location of hydrants and access to the
freeway. Water supplies and other factors must be pre-planned by the first due officers. Some typical
factors which must be considered:
EXAMPLES:
1. Early call for additional companies to handle lines that may have to be extended long
distances over obstacles.
2. Relay pumping probabilities.
3. Special equipment needs (tenders, foam, sand, diking materials, wreckers, etc.).
4. Early call for traffic control.
5. Sewers, drains, and pump stations (when dealing with spilled products).
6. Peak traffic hours create congestion and delays.
7. Access to the freeway (ladders, on/off ramps, etc.).
8. Hazardous Materials Team.
APPARATUS PLACEMENT
Whenever possible, place apparatus between oncoming traffic and operating personnel in order to
protect the scene from approaching vehicles. Warning lights must be visible to oncoming traffic.
Avoiding unnecessary blocking of traffic lanes will permit DPS to move traffic and relieve congestion.
Employ rear lights, flares, reflectors, or cones as required or as directed by the D.P.S. Traffic control
and warning devices should be left to the D.P.S. whenever possible. Communicate with the D.P.S.
whenever flammable liquid leaks, spills, etc., are present with regard to using flares.
Leave one crew member (usually the Engineer) to watch the traffic and set up warning devices until the
D.P.S. arrives. Parking brakes are to be set, and the apparatus set with the wheels at an angle to the
side.
A. Consider parking above or below (on access frontage) if the traffic conditions are such that
entry is impossible or difficult.
B. A booster line or other hose line may be employed as a rope to ascend or descend to the
freeway proper.
C. Where the freeway is elevated, a ladder is an effective means to gain access and to effect
evacuation from above
D. Only the apparatus that is absolutely necessary shall be taken onto the freeway, under the
direction of Command. The first due unit will proceed into the scene. All other units will stage
off of the freeway (if possible) to await an assignment.
E. Position apparatus in the emergency parking lane or on the shoulder, as far off the traffic
lanes as possible.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

FREEWAY RESPONSE
M.P. 205.15

12/98-R

Page 5 of 8

F. Do your job as rapidly as possible and then clear the traffic lanes.
G. A ladder company spotted on the access frontage will usually provide the best method of
advancing a line to elevated sections of the freeway.
H. In sections of depressed roadway, it is faster to have a company above "drop" a line than one
advanced up the slope.
I. Several sections of the freeway have no access frontages and will require laying hose for
long distances from on-ramps if a supply line is needed. Relay pumping and tenders should
be considered in these cases.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

FREEWAY RESPONSE
M.P. 205.15

12/98-R

Page 6 of 8

GLOSSARY
TERM

DEFINITION

OTHER NAMES

"Access Road"

Road parallel to freeway

"Frontage Road"

"Against the Wall"

Area around the median barrier wall

"Inside Shoulder"
"Median Wall"

"The Curve"*

Usually refers to the I-17 Durango
Curve; may also refer to the Broadway
Curve on I-10 or the I-10 curve at
Squaw Peak interchange

"Durango Curve"

"Distress Lane"

Usually refers to the area between
the median barrier wall and the
number one traffic lane; may also
refer to the emergency lane

"Emergency Lane"

"Gore Point"

Area around freeway entrance and exit

"Gore"

"H.O.V. Lane"

High Occupancy Vehicle lane

"Car Pool Lane",
"Bus Lane", or
"Diamond Lane"

"Main lane"

Controlled access freeway

"Mini-Stack"+

Squaw Peak interchange to I-10,
SR-51 and Loop-202, near 20th Street
and Roosevelt and McDowell Road

"Shoulder"

Usually refers to the area off the
roadway to the right of the emergency
lane; may also refer to the median
area near the left side of the roadway

"The Split"

The Maricopa Interchange (I-10/I-17)
traffic interchange west of the airport

"The Stack"

The Papago (I-10)/Black Canyon (I-17)
interchange, between 19th Avenue and
27th Avenue area

"Short Stack"+

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

FREEWAY RESPONSE
M.P. 205.15

12/98-R

Page 7 of 8

GLOSSARY

TERM

DEFINITION

OTHER NAMES

"The Tunnel"

The portion of the Papago freeway
(I-10) under Central Avenue, 3rd Street
to 3rd Avenue.

"The Deck"

"Unified Command"

Command post consisting of more than
one agency

* Request specific location from reporting party.
+ Use of term discouraged.
Lane numbering sequence: No. 1 is the traffic lane nearest the median or center, excluding the H.O.V.
lane.
PHOENIX METROPOLITAN FREEWAYS
NAME
DESIGNATOR
Black Canyon
Interstate 17

East Papago

Loop 202

LOCATION
Begins at the Durango Curve and continues north
through Phoenix
Begins at I-10/SR-51/L-202/ interchange and continues
east to the Price Freeway

Hohokam State Route 143

Begins at I-10 and 48 Street and continues north to
McDowell Road.

Maricopa

Portions of I-17

I-17 south (east) of the Durango Curve to the Maricopa
Interchange and I-10 continuing east

Papago

Interstate 10

Entering Phoenix from the west to the Maricopa
Interchange where it becomes the Maricopa Freeway

Squaw Peak

State Route 51

Begins at the I-10/ L-202/SR-51 interchange and
continues north

Superstition

US 60

Begins at the I-10/US 60 interchange and continues
east

Sky Harbor
Expressway

State Route 153

Begins at University Dr. to Sky Harbor Blvd.

Agua Fria Freeway Loop 101

Begins at I-17 and L-101 interchange and
continues west/southwest to Glendale Ave.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

FREEWAY RESPONSE
M.P. 205.15

12/98-R

Page 8 of 8

