PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

FOAM UNIT RESPONSE – OFF AIRPORT
M.P. 205.14

12/12-R

Page 1 of 2

The following procedure is for the dispatch and response of airport units off the airport and for Foam 34
and Foam 54 utilization.
The following units are available for response to off-airport incidents requiring large quantities of Class
B extinguishing agents:
Location

Unit

Sky Harbor

ATTACK 19
(4 Person Unit)

3,000 - (600)

500 lbs

Foam 1
(2 Person Unit)

4,000 - (600)

500 lbs

Foam 2
(2 Person Unit)

4,500 – (600)

500 lbs

Foam 3
(3 Person Unit)

4,500 - (600)
Halotron - 500 Lbs.

500 lbs

Water - AFFF (gal)

Dry Chemical (lbs)

Station 34

Foam 34

700 (foam concentrate)

Station 54

Foam 54

900 (foam concentrate)

The agents carried are Aqueous Film Forming Foam (AFFF) and Super K dry chemical.
(Note: a limited quantity of Polar Solvent Type AFFF is carried on Support 4.)
It is important to remember that AFFF will not work well on free-flowing burning fuels or fuel burning
under pressure. However, dry chemical agent is very effective under either of these conditions. The
AFFF and potassium base dry chemical carried on these units are compatible when used
simultaneously.
Circumstances that may require large volume foam and/or dry chemical equipment include:
1. Plane crash with or without fire;
2. Flammable liquid tanker accidents including spills with or without fire;
3. Railroad tanker incidents involving flammable liquids;
4. Interior fires involving petroleum products;
5. Flammable liquid bulk storage plants.
Responsibility
Fire Ground Command must immediately recognize that a major Class B or potential fire is a critical fire
ground factor. Initial plan development should include large volume foam and/or dry chemical
applications and should be implemented quickly with ARFF units "special called".

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

FOAM UNIT RESPONSE – OFF AIRPORT
M.P. 205.14

12/12-R

Page 2 of 2

First due Response Areas
Foam 34 and 54 --automatic response anywhere in the City.
Deer Valley has no chemical unit--north of Glendale Avenue.
Sky Harbor Foam unit with dry chemical capability—5 mile radius of airport and reserve units valley
wide- depending on availability.
Dispatch Procedures for Units
Upon special call, the Dispatch Center will dispatch units to Deer Valley or Sky Harbor units depending
on location. Foam 34 and /or 54 will be dispatched automatically to all flammable liquid incidents. Sky
Harbor ARFF equipment will be dispatched off the airport within a 5 mile radius for an aircraft incident.
If ARFF equipment is request from Command for any other incident it will require coordination with Sky
1 (or her/his designee) to assure that FAA Index D is maintained with the remaining foam units.
For off airport ARFF response utilizing Sky Harbor units, BC19 will be provided an ARFF Captain and
Engineer from Station 19 with reserve foam trucks.
Airport Foam units are large vehicles ill-equipped for Code Three response and have poor
maneuverability in city traffic. It is essential that any foam truck operator exercise great caution when
driving through traffic and consider that ARFF units are not structurally designed for long road
response.
Foam 34
Foam 34 will respond as a 2-piece company with an assigned engine company. The engine company
will assume the identity of Foam 34 when assigned to respond with this unit.
The pumper of the engine company will be responsible for laying supply lines to be the manifold, if
necessary. If available, Engine 34 will be assigned to respond with the Foam unit. When Engine 34 is
not readily available, another engine company may be assigned to pick up the Foam unit. Dispatch will
make this assignment.
Additional Foam
When it is apparent that additional foam concentrate will be needed, Command must coordinate
through Dispatch or Resource Management on the scene for additional agent. Presently, agent is
available at Sky Harbor AFFF mil spec 3% and Dry Chemical, Resource Management, Station 34 and
contract vendor. This need should be identified as early as possible.

