PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES
Policy Name:
Policy Number:
LIGHT RAIL OPERATIONS
M.P. 206.21
This policy is for internal use only and does not expand an employee’s legal duty or civil
liability in any way. This policy should not be construed as creating a duty to act or a higher
duty of care, with respect to third party civil claims against employees or the Phoenix Fire
Department (PFD). Remedies for violations of this policy, if proven, are limited to
administrative disciplinary action against PFD employees.
Related Policies:
Other Reference:
Date Implemented: 12/2021-R
Review Date: 12/2026

PURPOSE
This procedure provides guidelines for managing emergency incidents involving the Valley Metro
Light Rail System (VMR), highlights specific life safety hazards inherent to the system, and also
discusses considerations for shutting down power to the system when necessary. This procedure
also provides light rail system information necessary for safe operation and focuses on the most
likely light rail scenarios crews will encounter. However, these guidelines are not a universal
remedy, and due to the limitless possible scenarios responding personnel could encounter,
responding crews should always evaluate risk and exercise caution when operating near the light
rail system.
LIGHT RAIL TERMS
LRV= light rail vehicle
OCS= overhead catenary system (overhead light rail electrical wires)
TPSS= traction powered substation
ETS= emergency trip switch (located at TPSS)
OCC= operations control center (nerve center for communications and operations of light rail)
Pantograph= large mechanical arm that connects the LRV to the overhead wires
BACKGROUND
The Light Rail Vehicles (LRVs) operate on DC electric current supplied from the substations (TPSS)
by two overhead wires (OCS). LRV’s connect with the light rail system in an electrically powered
public transportation system. The light rail uses a two-track system that typically run parallel to
each other. The LRVs connect with the OCS via a pantograph (large mechanical arm) that can be
raised and lowered. The tracks operate as the negative return (not a significant electrical threat)
for the current. The Operations Control Center (OCC) functions as the nerve center for the light rail
and is able to communicate directly with light rail Operators, Transportation Supervisors, and
maintenance crews. The OCC is responsible for coordinating all light rail related emergency
LIGHT RAIL OPERATIONS
Page 1 of 6

activity. In the event of an emergency, the OCC has the ability remotely de-energize the OCS. The
OCC is located in the VMR Operations and Maintenance Center (605 SS. 48th St, Phoenix). The
estimated train frequency is every 12 minutes during peak operations and every 20 minutes during
off-peak hours. The LRV’s are controlled with an Operator located in the forward cab (each end
has a cab) of the LRV. The Operator must operate the train by utilizing a controller which controls
accelerations and braking. The controller is equipped with a “dead man” switch, which will bring
the LRV to a complete stop if the Operator becomes incapacitated. The system times traffic lights
using a predicative priority signally system that changes the signals much like the pedestrian
button and car sensors do, but the only system that actively takes control of traffic signals is the
Opticom system (when equipped) used by emergency responders. Train operators are required
to stop for all red lights and hazards.
LRV
•
•
•
•
•

90 feet long, 12 feet high, 9 feet wide Cab at each end (1 Light Rail Vehicle)
103,000 lbs. empty with 200-person max capacity
Normal max operating speed 35 mph
Approximately 190 foot stopping distance at 35 mph
Very Quiet

TRACK SWITCH LOCATIONS
• Allow train movement from one track to another
• Track switches move without warning
• Controlled manually / remotely
• Exert 1200 lbs. of force
• Will crush obstacles, including hands/feet if in switch location
• Manually operable
TRACTION POWER SUBSTATIONS (TPSS)
• Located approximately every mile
• Emergency Trip Switch (ETS) (located outside the door in Knox box)
• What’s inside: electrical equipment and Ni-cad batteries
• Electricity AC 12000-21000 volts in, and 650-950 volts DC out
OVERHEAD CONTACT SYSTEM - OCS (THE OVERHEAD WIRES)
• 750-950 Volts Direct Current (DC)
• 2000-6000 AMPs (Taser is .00021 amps 50k volts)
• Wires are tensioned at 5,000 lbs. top wire, and 3000 lbs. bottom wire
• Wires will whip if severed
• The normal height of the light rail overhead contact system wire is 18 feet; however, the
underpass at Washington and the SR143 has a max height of only 14.5 feet. BEWARE of
lights, flags, or anything else sticking up when crossing the line
LIGHT RAIL OPERATIONS
Page 2 of 6

RESPONSE
Crews responding Code 3 across the tracks shall adhere to our Code 3 driving procedures.
Additionally, any protrusion (extended utility lights, flags, etc.) must be lowered to avoid contact
with OCS. Furthermore, the tracks represent an additional lane of traffic that must be cleared when
driving. Left hand turns across the tracks account for the highest incidents of collisions with LRV’s.
•
•
•
•

Adds additional lane of traffic
Normal height of OCS is 18 feet
Lowest point is 14.5 feet located at Washington and the SR143 overpass
Have all lights and/or flags lowered

OPERATING IN LIGHT RAIL INTERSECTIONS
LRV’s are approximately 9 feet wide and operate on fixed rail. As such, LRV’s are incapable of
making contact with an object located outside of the LRV’s dynamic envelope. LRV Operators are
trained to operate at walking speed when emergency personnel are near the tracks. LRV’s are
equipped with a Car Wash Mode feature which restricts speed to no greater than 2MPH. The car
wash mode may be activated upon request. If LRV movement could compromise the safety of
firefighters operating on or adjacent to the light rail tracks, the Company Officer should contact
Fire Dispatch and request a notification be made to the OCC to operate LRV’s on the alternate track
(Single Track Operation). The OCC will dispatch a Transportation Supervisor to the scene and
implement an alternate service plan to ensure the safety of Fire personnel. Crews must remain
watchful for LRV’s, and Company Officers should consider assigning a crew member to watch for
LRV’s. In scenarios where both light rail tracks are obstructed (e.g., collision blocking both tracks,
supply lines etc.) Company Officers must contact the Fire Dispatch and request a notification be
made to the OCC advising of such conditions.
RESPONDING TO EMS CALLS ON THE LRV
• LVR Operator will coordinate next stop location with OCC and Alarm Room.
• The alarm room will provide the address and location during dispatch.
• Any open door on an LRV engages the brake and disables the throttle ensuring that the
LRV will not move.
• As long as the LRV is functioning normally and on the track, there is no need to shut down
power. This will allow the AC and lights to continue functioning.
• Maintain awareness of both LRV and vehicle traffic.

RESPONDING TO LRV VERSUS ANOTHER VEHICLE
When an LRV makes contact with a vehicle, the LRV Operator will notify the OCC. The Operator
will then check all LRV’s, and the occupants of the other vehicle for injury. All injury information
will be relayed to the OCC. Due to low operating speeds most LRV collisions will not result in a
derailment. A collision with a large vehicle (e.g., semi-truck, dump truck etc.) may result in a
LIGHT RAIL OPERATIONS
Page 3 of 6

derailment. If this occurs the LRV Operator will lower the pantograph and eliminate the
electrocution risk from the OCS.
In the event of derailment where the pantograph becomes entangled or is unable to be lowered,
the entire LRV becomes energized and poses a significant electrocution risk to both emergency
responders and any passenger who makes ground contact (completes the circuit).
Company Officers should complete the following evaluation upon arrival to any LRV derailment
or LRV vs. large vehicle accident:
ELECTRICAL HAZARD SIZE UP QUESTIONS
• Is the LRV on the tracks?
o If LRV is on tracks, pantograph may stay raised.
o If LRV is derailed, pantograph must be lowered.
• Is the Pantograph raised/tangled?
• Is the OCS intact (no poles or wires down)?
ELECTRICAL HAZARD SIZE UP
Scenario #1: If the LRV is derailed and the pantograph is still in contact with the OCS, responding
crews should not make contact with the LRV and advise the LRV Operator to lower the pantograph.
If the LRV Operator is unable to lower the pantograph, the Company Officer must de-energize the
OCS by employing the use of Option #1 or Option #2.
Scenario #2: If the OCS has been compromised or appears to be severely damaged, or if lines are
down then crews should not approach the LRV or track. The OCS must be de-energized by
employing the use of Option #1 or Option #2.
Option #1: The Company Officer must contact Fire Dispatch and request a notification be
made to the OCC to remotely de-energize the OCS. The OCC will have a visual notification
that the OCS has been de-energized and will dispatch a Transportation Supervisor to
respond to the incident scene with a Hot Stick to provide physical assurance that the OCS
is de-energized.
Option #2: The Company Officer should assign another company (or do it themselves if in
close proximity) to push the emergency trip switch (ETS) at the closest TPSS (requires Knox
key). Pushing the ETS at the TPSS shuts down incoming AC power and outgoing DC power,
and also sends a signal to the adjacent substations and shuts down their outgoing DC
power, effectively isolating the section of line from power. However, there is no visible
confirmation that power has actually been shut down. The Company Officer must contact
Fire Dispatch and request a notification be made to the OCC requesting a Transportation
Supervisor with Hot Stick to confirm that the OCS is de-energized.
LIGHT RAIL OPERATIONS
Page 4 of 6

In both instances Crews should refrain from physically touching the LRV and advise passengers
to wait inside the LRV, until power has been confirmed to be de-energized.
ACCESS AND EXTRICATION
• Easiest access is through the LRV doors. Crew can manually open them by opening the
exterior (emergency door releases). There is one location on each side of the vehicle,
located on the left side when facing the LRV.
o Windows are extremely hard to break
o Cutting through the body of the LRV doesn’t provide adequate access
• The train has been engineered with a bumper and bar 3 inches off the track to reduce the
chance of a person becoming trapped underneath.
• LRV’s are extremely heavy and unstable when lifting and this should be considered a last
resort.
• Valley Metro has a vehicle that can safely lift LVRs, but it has an estimated response time
of 30-60 minutes
TRAFFIC CONTROL
• Protect scene as necessary
• Beware of other LRV’s in opposite direction
• Consider assigning a crewmember as lookout for LRV’s
• Consider PD for traffic control
RESPONDING TO LRV FIRES
LRVs do not have a fire protection system (no sprinklers). Most of the working equipment (A/C,
power supplies, and batteries) are located on the top of the LRV. Crews must ensure the LRV, and
OCS are de- energized prior to attempting extinguishment of any significant LRV fires. Fires in the
bottom undercarriage should only be extinguished after the pantograph has been lowered but
does not necessitate shutting down the OCS.
Evacuate LRV (life safety first) to a safe location away from smoke
• Shut down power as necessary
• Stop other LRV traffic as necessary
• Protect the scene from traffic
RESPONDING TO FIRE AT TPSS
• Treat it like electrical substation/vault
• Do Not Enter or put water on it until absolutely confirmed de-energized by APS or SRP
• Beware of OCS
• Consider pushing the ETS, if it is safe to do so
• Call for hazmat if smoke is coming from within TPSS
• Be aware of the risk of hazardous smoke inhalation
LIGHT RAIL OPERATIONS
Page 5 of 6

MISCELLANEOUS
Natural Gas Incidents
• LRV’s produce significant sparks and represent an ignition source for natural gas leaks
• LRV’s traffic should be halted for any significant gas leak within close proximity
Impact of Smoke Plume on Light Rail System
• Treat the same way we treat other road closures for smoke plumes
o LRV’s have the ability to shut off outside air if necessary, and this should be a
minimum consideration if LRV’s are passing by smoke
IMPACTS TO FIRE OPERATIONS
The light rail system impacts Fire Department operations in several ways. First, the OCS represents
an electrical hazard as do other electrical lines. OSHA requires any apparatus, ladders, or other
equipment to maintain a ten-foot clearance from ungrounded electrical sources such as the OCS.
The tracks present access obstacles and influence apparatus placement. Lastly, the alignment can
impact water supply.
Consider the following:
• OCS electrical hazards
o Must stay 10 feet away (in every direction) per OSHA
o Electrocution risk if straight stream contacts energized OCS
o Ensure that operating hose streams do not contact the OCS
• Fire ground apparatus placement
o Crews should preplan first due areas and plan apparatus placement around the light
rail
• Laying supply lines across tracks
o Treat as a water supply of last resort and avoid whenever possible
o If it is necessary to lay supply lines across the tracks, the Incident Commander will
need to communicate clearly to the Alarm Room that they are doing so, and advise
them to shut down light rail traffic for that section

LIGHT RAIL OPERATIONS
Page 6 of 6

