PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

PRE-PLANNING FOR EMERGENCIES

M.P. 206.18

10/97-N

Page 1 of 3

PURPOSE
Pre-incident planning can provide valuable information about an occupancy which can improve the
ability of firefighters to respond effectively to a fire or other emergency at that location. Pre-incident
planning addresses vital fire protection concerns, such as: structure layout including access, contents,
construction details, types and locations of built-in fire protection systems. It includes all data which
can have an impact on decisions or actions taken during an emergency. Pre-incident planning should
be a joint venture between emergency services personnel and the occupants/owners of the property.
This procedure identifies the roles and responsibilities for fire companies, fire districts,
Urban Survival for Business, and Dispatch & Deployment in pre-planning for emergencies
including: Occupancy selection, Tactical Premise entry into the Phoenix Fire Department
RMS system, and record keeping.
FIRE COMPANIES
Each quarter, company officers will select a tactically significant occupancy to pre-plan for emergency
incidents in their first due area. What determines a "tactically significant occupancy" may vary
according to an individual company's response area but, may include, industrial facilities such as
woodworking, hazardous materials, general manufacturing or large storage facilities, residential
occupancies such as apartment complexes, condominium complexes, convalescent homes, or senior
care facilities, high-rise buildings, health care facilities such as hospitals, clinics or laboratories, and any
other occupancy the company officer feels is tactically significant.
When the company officer has selected an appropriate site for a pre-plan, he/she should meet the
owner/occupant at the selected site and, together with the owner/occupant, complete the Tactical
Premise Pre-plan Authorization Form. Once a pre-plan has been scheduled, the company officer
should forward a copy of the Tactical Premise Pre-plan Authorization Form to his/her battalion chief.
One copy will be kept by the company officer and placed in the Station Tactical Premise log. A sample
of the Tactical Premise Pre-plan Authorization Form can be found in the Tactical Premise handbook.
The company officer is expected to make every pre-plan a training opportunity. Pre-fire planning
guidelines can be found in the Building familiarization/Tactical Premise handbook. Pre-plan information
should be shared with the other two shifts in the station so they can conduct a walk through in the preplanned occupancy. Each company on each shift should schedule and complete a Tactical
Premise pre-plan on different occupancies.
During the pre-plan, the company will fill out the BUILDING FAMILIARIZATION / TACTICAL PREMISE
worksheet. Companies are encouraged to make drawings or record other information which may be
useful in a response book carried on the apparatus. When the company returns to quarters, the
information on the Building Familiarization/Tactical Premise worksheet is
entered into the Tactical Premise portion of the RMS system in the station computer. NOTE: If the
company is located in a Fire District with a designated Tactical Premise Coordinator, the
completed Building Familiarization/Tactical Premise worksheet is forwarded to the District
Office for entry into the CAD system (see District Responsibilities). Once the information has been
entered, the company officer will make a computer printout of the Tactical Premise information and
forward the printout to his/her battalion chief.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

PRE-PLANNING FOR EMERGENCIES

M.P. 206.18

10/97-N

Page 2 of 3

FIRE DISTRICT RESPONSIBILITY
The District Commander may choose to designate a District Tactical Premise Coordinator whose
primary responsibility would be Tactical Premise data entry. This would increase the possibilities of
consistent data entry.
When the battalion chief receives a copy of the Tactical Premise pre-plan authorization form, he/she
will place the form in the District pre-plan log. Battalion chiefs should make every effort to accompany
fire companies when they are conducting a pre-plan.
After the pre-plan information is in the RMS system, the battalion chief will receive a copy of the
Tactical Premise computer printout and then place it with the Tactical Premise pre-plan authorization
form in the District pre-plan log. The date the pre-plan was completed should be added to the Tactical
Premise pre-plan authorization form in the space provided.
When the Tactical Premise pre-plan authorization form is completed, the battalion chief will
make two copies of the completed form and forward them to the engine and ladder company that
completes the 2-1 first due assignment for the pre-planned occupancy so they can access the
information in Tactical Premise.
URBAN SURVIVAL FOR BUSINESS RESPONSIBILITY
The fire prevention specialist assigned to each District will review the District pre-plan log at the
beginning of each month. The fire prevention specialist will advise the battalion chief(s) that he/she is
available should any company need technical assistance regarding Fire Code issues in the buildings
scheduled for pre-planning.
Each fire prevention specialist assigned to Urban Survival for Business participates in the SelfInspection Program and is responsible for contacting 25 businesses per week. The fire prevention
specialist will place information received from these contacts into the Tactical Premise portion of RMS
including, Business Name and Address, Responsible Party information, and any other information
which may be useful to responding companies.
Fire prevention specialists routinely respond to service requests in all categories of tactically significant
occupancies, inspect industrial facilities, and respond to fire company requests
for service. Every time a fire prevention specialist makes contact with a business or other
occupancy, the fire prevention specialist will obtain responsible party information from that occupancy
and place that information into Tactical Premise. The fire prevention specialist will occasionally
encounter an occupancy which is tactically significant but which has no information in Tactical Premise.
The fire prevention specialist will bring this information to the attention of the District Commander of the
Fire District which contains the occupancy.
Whenever a fire prevention specialist encounters a situation that changes the Tactical Premise
information for a specific occupancy, the fire prevention specialist will enter the changes into the
Tactical Premise portion of the RMS system. The Tactical Premise entry will receive a new revision
date and a computer printout of the updated information will be made. The fire prevention specialist will
then forward a copy of the updated information to the first due company officer. The fire prevention
specialist will send a second copy of the Tactical Premise printout to the battalion chief who will update
the District Pre-plan log.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

PRE-PLANNING FOR EMERGENCIES

M.P. 206.18

10/97-N

Page 3 of 3

DISPATCH AND DEPLOYMENT RESPONSIBILITY
When it becomes obvious that there is a working fire, hazardous materials incident, or other incident
which might require information contained in Tactical Premise, the Dispatch and Deployment Captain
will immediately begin monitoring the tactical radio channel.
While units are responding or as soon as practical, the Dispatch and Deployment Captain will
retrieve tactical and/or responsible party information from the Tactical Premise database using the TP,
TPI, or TPB commands .
Having the Tactical Premise information displayed at the alarm Captains terminal will allow
him/her to provide critical information to command when needed. For example; Phoenix units are
working a structure fire at Troy Biosciences, the first in ladder company has not had time to look at
Tactical Premise information for this structure and Command says “go to the roof and ventilate.”
The Dispatch and Deployment Captain has been listening to the radio traffic and sees that Troy
Biosciences (through the Tactical Premise display on his terminal) has a metal clad roof. The
Dispatch and Deployment Captain relays this information to Command who advises the Ladder
to take a metal saw blade with them. The roof is quickly ventilated and the progress of the fire is
stopped.
Tactical Premise may be accessed using the TP, TPI, TPB, RP, RPI, and RPB commands from any
terminal in Dispatch. If the Dispatch and Deployment Captain is busy with another incident, the
Supervisor or TRO will provide Tactical Premise information as noted above.

