PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Toxic Exposure Investigations Program
M.P. 206.16

01/19

Page 1 of 3

Policy
It is the policy of the Phoenix Regional Fire Department to investigate and document all known
or suspected toxic exposures. The Phoenix Fire Department Health Center will collect all data
and maintain records of all exposures. The designated Certified Industrial Hygienist to the
Phoenix Fire Department will be responsible for the collection of all samples and
communication with the appropriate laboratory on their findings.
Toxic Exposure Forms are located on every station computer on Fire Point, or can be accessed
on personal/mobile devices at http:cityofphoenix.sharepoint.com/sites/fire.
Purpose
The purpose of the investigation and reporting of toxic exposures is to document all known and
unknown substances that a member may have been exposed to on any given incident. In cases
where a member’s health is affected by toxic substances, the documentation and laboratory
findings will be used to support the evidence of possible adverse health effects.
Contents
Incident number, time, date, location, and business/occupancy name: This data is to be filled
out from the corresponding dispatch information. Inaccurate information must be corrected as
soon as possible or notified to the Toxic Exposure Officer.
Incident Type: Select the appropriate category. If any unusual circumstances exist, fill out the
Other/Describe section as accurately as possible.
Chemicals involved in incident: Obtain from on-scene Command, Haz Mat sector, or C957 N/S.
List chemicals from Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS), or bill of lading.
Units exposed: Obtain from incident history. List all units.
Lab results: These forms may not be readily available until the laboratory or the Industrial
Hygienist completes all testing and findings are completed. Once the results are received by
the Toxic Exposure Officer, those reports will be filed and stored at the Phoenix Fire
Department Health Center. Electronic Toxic Exposure forms on Share Point will then be
updated to include these results to each member’s report by the Toxic Exposure Officer.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Toxic Exposure Investigations Program
M.P. 206.16

01/19

Page 2 of 3

Toxic Exposure Reporting
Phoenix Regional Fire Department members who are exposed to known or suspected toxic
substances during the performance of work duties must contact the Toxic Exposure Officer.
The Toxic Exposure Officer will initiate the toxic exposure investigation.
On all incidents where personnel are exposed, a minimum of the Toxic Exposure Form shall be
completed. In an exposure incident where personnel feel symptomatic, they shall follow the
Toxic Exposure Notification process below.
Toxic Exposure Notification
When personnel are exposed to toxic substances, whether known or suspected, Dispatch and
Deployment, along with their Immediate Supervisor should be contacted immediately so that
the investigation can be initiated at the time of the exposure and at the incident location of the
exposure. Dispatch will then notify the Toxic Exposure Officer.
Due to the type of exposure, and the probability of multiple employees becoming exposed, the
TEO will communicate with Car 957 and Command at the incident.
The Toxic Exposure Officer will be responsible for gathering information as it comes available
to him/her, and shall be included in his/her findings in the report.
Notification of all employees exposed will be made as soon as possible. All exposed employees
shall fill out a Fire Personnel Toxic Exposure Report located on Fire Point.
Symptomatic exposed personnel shall be transported to the Phoenix Fire Department Health
Center or to Banner University Medical Center Phoenix (depending on severity) for evaluation
and treatment. Consider the availability of hyperbaric chamber therapy at Banner University
Medical Center Phoenix for members with known or suspected smoke inhalation.
Notification should be made to Car 959 in instances where members are transported to a
hospital. The Car 959 Officer can serve as liaison between the TEO and hospital staff.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Toxic Exposure Investigations Program
M.P. 206.16

01/19

Page 3 of 3

Documentation of Exposure
The Toxic Exposure Officer is responsible for conducting an investigation and completing a
report in conjunction with the Certified Industrial Hygienist designated to the Phoenix Fire
Department. The investigation will also consist of sample collection at the incident performed
by the Certified Industrial Hygienist and may be assisted by the Hazardous Material Team if
proper PPE is required. The Toxic Exposure Officer or designee can special call a hazardous
materials unit to conduct sample collecting if the nature of the incident so dictates it. The
Certified Industrial Hygienist will determine what types of samples to collect and then be
responsible for getting the samples to a lab for analysis. The Certified Industrial Hygienist will
have a sample collection kit that will be given to the hazardous materials team for the
collection of samples. Each sample will be identified with an identification number and
categorized appropriately. Location, time and date of sample collection will also be
documented by the Toxic Exposure Officer or Certified Industrial Hygienist. Once the data is
collected and the sample analysis is received from the lab, the Toxic Exposure Officer will add
the results to each members Toxic Exposure Form and file the results in the archives at The
Phoenix Fire Department Health Center.

