PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

POLICE ASSISTANCE/EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS
M.P. 206.09

03/12-R

Page 1 of 3

The purpose of this procedure is to establish guidelines for the dispatch, response, deployment and
communications model of Phoenix Fire Department resources and members assisting the Phoenix
Police Department with the disposal of explosive materials and/or devices.
In order to provide for the highest level of customer service and to ensure for the safety of officers on
scene of an EOD (Explosive Ordinance Disposal) operation, the Phoenix Police Department may
request assistance of the fire department for standby medical assistance during special incidents
requiring the deployment of the PPD Bomb Squad. These incidents may include “suspicious packages
or letters, bomb threats etc. This procedure does not necessarily apply to incidents where injuries have
already occurred. When emergency medical stand by is requested by a Phoenix PD Bomb Squad
supervisor through Phoenix Fire Alarm, the on duty Car 958 Captain (Terrorism Liaison Officer) and the
designated PD TLO should immediately be contacted via telephone or pager to contact the Phoenix
Fire Alarm Room. During the majority of EOD operations, the C958 Captain will have already been
briefed on the operation prior to Alarm Room personnel being contacted. However, no matter how the
request for fire department stand by is obtained, it is CRITICAL that information be shared between
Phoenix PD, C958 and the on duty Deployment Battalion Chief, in order to maintain situational
awareness and to provide adequate resources. There may also be instances when other local, county
and State law enforcement agencies will request Phoenix Fire resources to stand by for EOD
operations within the City of Phoenix. When these requests are received, the same approach will be
followed. The fire department will be requested only after a device and/or materials are discovered and
sufficient information/intelligence is gathered by C958 and coordinated through the on duty Deployment
Battalion Chief. NOTE: anytime Phoenix Fire resources are dispatched, the appropriate Battalion Chief
must be contacted and provided situational awareness.
Communications
Due to the critical need for stealth in certain police operations and easy public access to public safety
radio communications, all fire department communications on Police EOD incidents will be conducted
primarily through C958 on an encrypted radio channel. All pertinent information regarding staging
locations, target address, and safety issues will then be relayed to the Company Officer or Command
Officer that will be on scene as stand by. This communication can be made prior to the deployment and
staging of resources over direct telephone line, MCT and/or face-to-face whenever possible. Units shall
avoid any radio traffic in regards to the nature of the incident, address, etc. The Alarm Room TRO
and/or Supervisor will also be made aware of this information for accountability and tracking purposes.
The Alarm Room shall also make all appropriate notifications. Whenever possible, the C958 Captain
and the PD TLO will attend the Bomb Squad briefing where the majority of the information will be
shared. If time does not permit for a formal briefing to be conducted, C958 will make contact with the on
scene Phoenix PD Supervisor to obtain all necessary information pertaining to the operation. Due to the
fact that the C958 Captain is privy to law enforcement sensitive information, only information that is
CRITICAL to the safety and welfare of fire department personnel on scene should be shared.
Once the “target address” is obtained by C958, he/she will determine a safe and secure staging
location for fire resources. C958 will then inform the Alarm Room of the “target address” and request a
premise alert for a minimum of one/quarter (1/4) of a mile for the address. This zone will allow for PD
evacuation zones and routes, encompasses adjoining neighborhoods, large occupancies (apartment
complexes, shopping malls, commercial buildings etc.) and provides a buffer zone for secondary
devices. In this instance, it is crucial that the closest Battalion Chief and Shift Commander are notified
immediately by the Alarm Room. The premise alert will ensure that no other outside fire resources are
dispatched into the location.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

POLICE ASSISTANCE/EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS
M.P. 206.09

03/12-R

Page 2 of 3

In the event of an incident being dispatched in proximity to EOD Operations, the Alarm Room will
contact C958 to determine if the area is safe for fire department units to continue response. If
conditions dictate a response, the closest Battalion Chief should be dispatched to manage the
deployment of resources and to interact with PD to provide field force protection. If the on scene
Command Officer deems it necessary, upgrading to a Tiered Response should be considered with the
Shift Commanders making final determination. The staging location shall be determined by C958 after
attending an initial briefing with the Phoenix PD Bomb Squad.
Deployment
The nearest ALS fire company and rescue company will be dispatched to police EOD operations
anywhere in the city. Response will be CODE 2 unless Code 3 is requested by C958 via the Alarm
Room due to extended response times or critical events that may have unfolded at the EOD operation.
The Deployment Battalion Chief and/or supervisor will notify the on duty Shift Commanders and apprise
him/her of any situation that changes in complexity or severity.
The C958 Captain will act as the initial Incident Commander on scene and will establish a unified
command with the appropriate police department supervisor. CRITICAL NOTE: C958 will act as the
command and Control component on scene and will provide strategic direction for all fire department
resources staged and/or deployed on scene. The main role of the C958 Captain is that of Liaison
between Phoenix PD and Phoenix Fire resources. In the event that the operation changes in size,
complexity and/or severity, C958 shall request appropriate resources and a Command Officer should
be requested to assume the Command and Control piece for fire resources. For long-term, low-key
situations, C958 has the option to stage fire resources in quarters until the PPD Bomb Squad is
prepared to engage in high risk activities. C958 shall keep the Deployment Battalion Chief and/or
supervisor apprised of site operations to ensure adequate safety, support and situational awareness.
For situations of serious nature or complexity, the on scene Command Officer will assume Fire
Command and remain in constant communications via C958, with Police Command. All efforts should
be made to establish a single Unified Command location to enhance safety and operations. Should an
unforeseen accident (critically injured police officer/civilian) occur during the removal/disposal of the
explosive device or material, C958 shall request appropriate resources via the Alarm Room. If a
Command Officer is not on scene, the closest Battalion Chief shall be dispatched to coordinate fire
department resources. The Deployment Battalion Chief or his/her designee shall make proper
notifications, including the on duty Shift Commanders. Level 2 staging shall be considered and strictly
adhered to until the area is determined “secure” to enter by Fire Command and under the advisement
of the Bomb Squad Supervisor. When feasible, C958 shall also request the response of additional
TLO’s to assist with on scene Intelligence and Operational activities.
All members on scene of an EOD operation and/or detonation shall adhere to guidelines set
forth in the PFD Risk Management Plan. It is crucial that all members maintain situational
awareness and be cognizant of the possible presence of secondary explosive devices.
At no time should C958 or any other fire department personnel operate in an active “law
enforcement inner perimeter”. At NO time will fire department equipment or personnel become
directly involved with a search, handling or removal of an explosive device or material.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

POLICE ASSISTANCE/EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS
M.P. 206.09

03/12-R

Page 3 of 3

Based on the determination of the PPD Bomb Squad, the device or material may be disarmed on scene
of the incident or may be transported to an offsite disposal area. If an offsite disposal location is
chosen, C958 and the on scene Command Officer shall evaluate the support functions of the disposal
such as (Evacuation, Rehab, Fire/EMS support, Haz Mat etc.)
If the medical standby is to be of a longer than 2 hours, a rotation of companies should be considered.
C958 will arrange a relief schedule in cooperation with Dispatch & Deployment.
Special Considerations
Occasionally the PPD Bomb Squad may be called out to assist with a suspicious package that was
delivered via the United States Postal Service (USPS). If the package or letter is confirmed NOT to be
an explosive device by the Bomb Squad, C958 shall coordinate efforts with on scene Hazardous
Materials units, C957 and the Command Officer to assure that proper radiological and nuclear testing
have been performed on the package. C958 shall also ensure that the appropriate "Field Safe Survey"
is completed. C958 shall ensure that the Public Health Coordinator for the PFD Homeland Defense
Bureau in notified as early as possible. The Public Health Coordinator is a critical liaison to the Arizona
State Laboratory and the Maricopa County Department of Public Health. This is of great importance
due to the fact that once the substance is through the "Field Safe Survey", packaged and delivered to
the Arizona State Laboratory; the incident becomes an issue of Public Health (notification, treatment,
follow up, etc). State and County public health entities will work in cooperation of the law enforcement
investigation. C958 and the Homeland Defense Public Health Coordinator will then assist the
responsible Law enforcement agency and the USPS Inspector with maintaining the chain of custody
until the package is delivered to the State of Arizona Laboratory for final testing.

NOTE: Occasionally, some County, State and Federal law enforcement agencies may request
Phoenix Fire resources to provide medical stand by, as their own special duty hazardous
materials squads make entry or perform field tests on suspicious packages. Once a request is
received for units through the Phoenix Fire Alarm Room, C958 should be immediately notified
and dispatched prior to any resources being dedicated. C958 can then interface with the
respective law enforcement agency and determine the proper course of action for the resources
being requested. Any information gathered by C958 from the agency can then be shared with
the Deployment Battalion Chief and Shift Commanders.

