PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

SUPERVISING LESS EXPERIENCED PERSONNEL
M.P. 206.03

09/96-R

Page 1 of 2

The purpose of this procedure is to describe the requirements necessary for supervising less
experienced personnel at working incidents.
The integral part of safe operations at an incident site is that the fire company functions as a team,
supervised by the company officer. The company officer is responsible for the supervision and welfare
of all personnel in his/her company and other fire fighters assigned to his/her supervision.
It is important to recognize that fire fighters gain "experience" at different rates. Experience levels
depend upon time on the job, number, type and intensity of past incidents, and the quality of
supervision and training that the fire fighter has gained.
It is also important to recognize that inexperienced personnel caught in a hot, smoke-filled environment
with zero visibility, or other hazardous or unfamiliar environment, can easily take inappropriate action
resulting in injury or death to themselves or others.
With the arrival of a new or less experienced fire fighter to the company, the company
officer--and all crew members assume responsibility for the new fire fighter.
For the purpose of this procedure, a "less experienced" fire fighter is defined as:
A.
B.

Probationary fire fighter.
Any member with less than two years total experience assigned to fire fighting duties.

It should be noted that two years fire fighting experience, does not necessarily qualify that individual as
experienced. Fire fighters may still require direct supervision.
It will be the responsibility of the company officer to determine the experience level of all fire fighters
assigned to his/her company through the following methods:
Interview:

Interview the fire fighter to determine time assigned to fire fighting duties, previous
assignments, type and amount of prior experience.

Evaluate:

Evaluate the fire fighters proficiency in hose lays, SCBA, ladder, evolutions, etc.
Determine the fire fighter's knowledge of fire fighting and safety procedures. Interview
previous company officers on the fire fighter's past performance.

Training:

Provide frequent and appropriate training to improve skill levels and maintain proficiency.

Follow-up:

Provide follow-up evaluation and training. Evaluate the fire fighter's performance at
each incident. Interview other fire fighters who worked with the fire fighter.

Those fire fighters determined to be inexperienced will be directly supervised by the company officer or
a fire fighter with greater than two years total fire fighting experience.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

SUPERVISING LESS EXPERIENCED PERSONNEL
M.P. 206.03

09/96-R

Page 2 of 2

Direct supervision will be required at the moment the fire fighter enters an area that exposes the fire
fighter to potential injury or death. Examples include:
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.

Entering a building involved with smoke or fire.
Approaching a potential collapse area.
Potential explosion or flash fire.
Approaching a hazardous materials incident.
Entering an area where hazard line tape is present.
Any other area that could cause injury or death to the fire fighter.

The fact that a fire fighter meets the time in assignment criteria to be an experienced fire fighter does
not relieve the supervisor of his/her responsibilities. All personnel at an incident will be supervised by
and accountable to a company officer or command officer.
The experienced fire fighter, however, may be permitted, under appropriate and safe circumstances, to
function at an incident without direct supervision of a company officer.

