PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

RECRUIT TRAINING VEHICULARS
M.P. 206.03A

03/09-N

Page 1 of 3

PURPOSE
The purpose of this procedure to is to establish guidelines for the operations of recruit training
vehiculars. The Fire Department recognizes that recruit vehiculars is a critical phase of the recruit’s
training, and allows the recruit to experience the actual work of a firefighter. This is done under the
close supervision of Recruit Training Officers (RTOs), and it is conducted prior to the recruit leaving the
Training Academy and reporting to his or her first probationary station rotation.
This procedure will also ensure the recruit gets a meaningful experience while maintaining a safe
environment and allowing for a good communications link between the Training Academy and the
Operations Section of the Fire Department.
COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN TRAINING AND OPERATIONS
It is critical that the Operations Division is aware of recruit vehicular training and the battalions that this
training will be occurring in. In the past, recruit-training companies have added on to incidents and the
responding field companies and command officers were not aware of their presence. This can lead to
confusion and could be dangerous to the recruits.
The responsibility of notification to Operations of any vehicular training from the Phoenix Fire
Department Regional Training Academy (TA) will be the Division Chief of Training. The Division Chief
of Training will notify the North, South and West Shift Commanders on all three shifts, via e-mail or
telephone, of the dates and times that vehicular training will be conducted.
In addition, the Division Chief of Training will place a notice in the Buckslip and through department email and notify all members of the dates and times that vehicular training will be conducted. This
should be done at least one week prior to the date of the training. The training companies should use
the vehicle designation of Engines 96 through 99. These vehicle numbers are reserved for the TA and
are recognized throughout the automatic aid system as training crews.
The RTOs of the individual training companies will notify the specific Battalion Chiefs of the battalions
that the training vehicles will be operating in. For instance, if the vehicular engine will be operating in
Station 30’s first due, the RTO will notify by phone Battalion 8 and advise the Battalion Chief of the
plans to train in that area.
The RTO also needs to contact the captain of the Engine and/or Ladder Company and inform them of
the recruit-training vehicle in the area. This will give the assigned Company Officer a heads-up for the
training vehicle, and to allow the Company Officer to plan to use the training vehicle in the most safe
and positive manner.
If the training company plans to move to another battalion for extended operations, the RTO should call
the respective Company Officer and Battalion Chief of the new area and inform them of the vehicular
company’s plans to operate in their area.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

RECRUIT TRAINING VEHICULARS
M.P. 206.03A

03/09-N

Page 2 of 3

RECRUIT COMPANY’S OPERATIONS ON FIELD INCIDENTS
Phoenix Regional Standard Operating Procedures M.P. 206.03 describes in detail the procedure of
Supervising Less Experienced Personnel. This procedure should be understood completely by anyone
involved in the supervision of recruit training companies. Some of the critical issues regarding recruittraining companies are the following:
•

All Command Officers in charge of an incident that has recruit training companies operating on their
incident should be careful of assigning the training crew to any dangerous or critical assignment.
Remember that these training crews are usually two Company Officers and up to 4 recruits. This
may be difficult to closely supervise the recruits while operating in a critical, fast moving
assignment.

•

The recruit training vehicles should avoid adding themselves on to incident many miles away from
their current location. Driving code three many miles through city traffic increases the exposure of
both fire personnel and citizens to unnecessary accidents, and the chances of the training vehicle
getting on the incident scene in time to perform is low. The RTO may choose to add on and
respond Code 2 outside their assigned response area to provide relief for companies working
large/long term fires such as recycle or pallet yard fires.

TRAINING OPERATIONS OF AUTOMATIC AID AND NON-MUTUAL AID FIRE DEPARTMENTS
On occasion, recruit training vehicles and crews from other fire departments will operate within the City
of Phoenix. This may be done in attempts to have the recruits work in high traffic areas and increase
the amount of responses and gain more experience. This is understandable but it must be done
through a structured manner.
Any training crews operating inside the City of Phoenix must belong to the Automatic Aid system. This
ensures that the recruit personnel and their company officers have training that is compatible with that
of Phoenix fire crews. This compatibility will allow for safe and effective fire grounds operations. Any
training crews that are from a system that does not follow Regional Standard Operating Procedures
(Volume 2) as approved by the Regional Operations Consistency Committee (ROCC) or that is not a
member in the Automatic Aid system will not be allowed to operate for training purposes within the City
of Phoenix city limits.
Any non-Phoenix training academy vehicular that conforms to the Automatic Aid guidelines may
operate within the City of Phoenix boundaries. The Chief in charge of Training for the respective
agency should contact the Phoenix Fire Department Training Academy Deputy Chief at least four
weeks prior to the commencement of training. The Deputy Chief of the Training Academy will contact
the Shift Commanders and request permission for the outside agencies to conduct vehiculars for the
desired dates and times. These times and dates will also be placed in the Buckslip and on department
e-mail for all members. In addition, the RTOs of the individual training companies will notify the specific
Battalion Chiefs of the battalions that the training vehicles will be operating in.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

RECRUIT TRAINING VEHICULARS
M.P. 206.03A

03/09-N

Page 3 of 3

The communication of this procedure from Phoenix Fire Department to Automatic Aid departments will
be through the Deputy Chief of Training of the Phoenix Fire Department. The Training Chief is aware
of the other training programs within the Valley, and has established relationships with the other
training chiefs.
For uniformity and recognition, any training vehicles from Automatic Aid fire departments should use
vehicle designations that involve the numbers 96 through 99. The vehicle number may utilize the
numbers of the respective department, followed by 96 – 99. For example, a Glendale training truck
may use Engine 1599. A Tempe training truck may be Engine 2799. Since these numbers are
recognized as training trucks, this would increase the chances of all officers identifying the company as
a training crew and respond accordingly to this procedure and to M. P. 206.03.

