PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES
Policy Name:
Policy Number:
HEAT STRESS MANAGEMENT
M.P. 206.19
This policy is for internal use only and does not expand an employee’s legal duty or civil
liability in any way. This policy should not be construed as creating a duty to act or a higher
duty of care, with respect to third party civil claims against employees or the Phoenix Fire
Department (PFD). Remedies for violations of this policy, if proven, are limited to
administrative disciplinary action against PFD employees.
Related Policies:
Other Reference:
Date Implemented: 05/2022-R
Review Date: 05/2028

PURPOSE
The purpose of this procedure is to establish guidelines and responsibilities for minimizing the
effects of heat stress to department members.
POLICY
Effective June 1st to September 30th of each year, or at the discretion of the on-duty Shift
Commander, Dispatch and Deployment shall provide an additional ALS Engine Company to any
working fire incident. A Rehab Unit will be dispatched on all First Alarm and greater incidents.
PROCEDURE
Strenuous physical activities in high temperatures affect all organ systems of the body. The effect
is relative to how hot it is, duration of exposure, type of activity, and a variety of other factors. For
example, during long and even short duration strenuous activities at temperatures above 105
degrees Fahrenheit, normal cooling mechanisms can be stressed and overwhelmed. In the interest
of reducing the impact of heat related stress on members, the following directives are to be
followed whenever the temperature is at or above 105 degrees Fahrenheit:
1. Each member will be responsible to:
a. Maintain proper rest/nutrition regimen
b. Observe appropriate work/rest cycles
c. Hydrate before, during, and after each shift (minimize coffee, tea, and cola products)
d. Inform supervisor of any ill effects due to heat
2. In addition to the above, Company Officers are responsible for monitoring and managing:
a. Cardiovascular activity (i.e., tennis, racquetball, running, etc.) shall be limited to a
maximum of 30 minutes

HEAT STRESS MANAGEMENT
Page 1 of 2

b. A minimum of 64 ounces (2 quarts) of fluid should be consumed during the 24-hour
shift
c. Work/rest cycles, request a relief company and assignment to rehab after crew has
consumed two bottles of air
d. Company activity and request additional resources as necessary
3. During emergency operations the Incident Commander is responsible for the following:
a. Consider the establishment of a Rehab Sector/Division/Group on all working fires
b. Assign companies to Rehab Sector/Division/Group as needed or requested
(companies shall remain in rehab for a minimum of 20 minutes)
c. Utilize the practice of first company in, first company out routine
d. Request additional resources as necessary

HEAT STRESS MANAGEMENT
Page 2 of 2

