PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

POLICE DEPARTMENT SAU OPERATIONS
M.P. 206.09A

03/12-R

Page 1 of 4

This procedure describes the response, deployment and communications model of fire department
companies to a request for assistance from the Phoenix Police Department's Special Assignment Unit
(SAU).
In order to provide for the highest level of customer service and to ensure for the safety of officers on
scene of an SAU operation, the Phoenix Police Department may request assistance of the fire
department for standby medical assistance during special incidents requiring the deployment of the
Police Special Assignment Unit (SAU). These incidents may include barricade and hostage situations,
serving of warrants, “drop houses” etc. This procedure does not necessarily apply to incidents where
injuries have already occurred. When emergency medical stand by is requested by a Phoenix PD SAU
supervisor through Phoenix Fire Alarm, the on duty Car 958 Captain (Terrorism Liaison Officer) and the
designated PD TLO should immediately be contacted via telephone or pager to contact the Phoenix
Fire Alarm Room. During the majority of SAU operations, the C958 Captain will have already been
briefed on the operation prior to Alarm Room personnel being contacted. However, no matter how the
request for fire department stand by is obtained, it is CRITICAL that information be shared between
Phoenix PD, C958 and the on duty Deployment Battalion Chief, in order to maintain situational
awareness and to provide adequate resources. There may also be instances when other local, county
and State law enforcement agencies will request Phoenix Fire resources to stand by for SAU
operations within the City of Phoenix. When these requests are received, the same approach will be
followed.
Communications
Due to the critical need for stealth in certain police operations and easy public access to public safety
radio communications, all fire department communications on Police SAU incidents will be conducted
primarily through C958 on an encrypted radio channel. All pertinent information regarding staging
locations, target address, and safety issues will then be relayed to the Company Officer or Command
Officer that will be on scene as stand by. If the Company Officer’s BC has not been dispatched, he/she
must be notified and briefed on all pertinent information. This communication can be made prior to the
deployment and staging of resources over direct telephone line, MCT and/or face-to-face whenever
possible. Units shall avoid any radio traffic in regards to the nature of the incident, address, etc. The
Alarm Room TRO and/or Supervisor will also be made aware of this information for accountability and
tracking purposes. The Alarm Room shall also make all appropriate notifications. Whenever possible,
the C958 Captain and the PD TLO will attend the SAU briefing where the majority of the information will
be shared. If time does not permit for a formal briefing to be conducted, C958 will make contact with the
on scene Phoenix PD Supervisor to obtain all necessary information pertaining to the operation. Due to
the fact that the C958 Captain is privy to law enforcement sensitive information, only information that is
CRITICAL to the safety and welfare of fire department personnel on scene should be shared.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

POLICE DEPARTMENT SAU OPERATIONS
M.P. 206.09A

03/12-R

Page 2 of 4

Deployment
The nearest ALS fire company and rescue company will be dispatched to police SAU operations
anywhere in the city. Response will be CODE 2 unless Code 3 is requested by C958 via the Alarm
Room due to extended response times or critical events that may have unfolded at the SAU operation.
The Deployment Battalion Chief and/or supervisor will notify the on duty Shift Commanders and the
appropriate BC to apprise them of any situation that changes in complexity or severity.
The C958 Captain will act as the initial Incident Commander on scene and will establish a unified
command with the appropriate police department supervisor. CRITICAL NOTE: C958 will act as the
Command and Control component on scene and will provide strategic direction for all fire department
resources staged and/or deployed on scene. The main role of the C958 Captain is that of Liaison
between Phoenix PD and Phoenix Fire resources. In the event that the operation changes in size,
complexity and/or severity, C958 shall request appropriate resources and a Command Officer should
be requested to assume the Command and Control piece for fire resources. For long-term, low-risk
situations, C958 has the option to stage fire resources in quarters until SAU is prepared to engage in
high risk activities. C958 shall keep the Deployment Battalion Chief and/or supervisor apprised of site
operations to ensure adequate safety, support and situational awareness. For situations of serious
nature or complexity, the on scene Command Officer will assume Fire Command and remain in
constant communications via C958, with Police Command. All efforts should be made to establish a
single Unified Command location to enhance safety and operations.
At no time should C958 or any other fire department personnel operate within an active “law
enforcement inner perimeter”. Inner perimeter activities are extremely dynamic and fast moving
with the potential to escalate quickly. An inner perimeter is defined as a forward and isolated
zone where law enforcement officers are in tactical positions with protective gear and weapons
engaged and their primary purpose is mitigating a hostile and/or violent incident or suspect.
On-Site Operations
Responding companies will stage in a safe location from the scene, outside the Police control
perimeter, and out of the line of any possible gun fire. Once the “target address” is obtained by C958,
he/she will determine a safe and secure staging location for fire resources. C958 will then inform the
Alarm Room of the “target address” and request a premise alert for a minimum of one/quarter (1/4) of a
mile for the address. This zone will allow for PD evacuation zones and routes, encompasses adjoining
neighborhoods, large occupancies (apartment complexes, shopping malls, commercial buildings etc.)
and provides a buffer zone for active shooter scenarios. In this instance, it is crucial that the closest
Battalion Chief and Shift Commander be notified immediately via the Alarm Room. The premise alert
will ensure that no other outside fire resources are dispatched into the location. In the event of an
incident being dispatched in proximity to SAU operations, the Alarm Room will contact C958 to
determine if the area is safe for fire department units to continue response. If conditions dictate a
response, the closest Battalion Chief should be dispatched to manage the deployment of resources and
to interact with PD to provide field force protection. If the on scene Command Officer deems it
necessary, upgrading to a Tiered Response should be considered with the Shift Commanders making
final determination.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

POLICE DEPARTMENT SAU OPERATIONS
M.P. 206.09A

03/12-R

Page 3 of 4

If the medical standby is longer than 2 hours, a rotation of companies should be considered. C958 will
arrange a relief schedule in cooperation with Dispatch & Deployment.
Additional Resources
The Rehab Unit may be dispatched to the Fire staging location, Code 2 if requested by C958 or the
Command Officer on the scene. Personnel assigned to the Rehab Unit will contact C958 or the IC on
scene and work under their direction. The Rehab unit will remain on-site unless needed for a more
significant incident elsewhere. Phoenix PD also utilizes the services of Phoenix Fire CR Vans
occasionally. CR Van personnel are utilized for assisting with families, customers or “crime victims” that
may be impacted by the SAU operations. In the event that a CR Van is requested to respond to the
scene by PD, C958 will be their point of contact to ensure the scene is secure. At no time should CR
Van personnel be dispatched to an SAU operation without C958 knowledge and/or advisement.
Safety
Fire department deployment to SAU operations is for standby medical assistance only should a police
officer or civilian be injured. Fire personnel WILL NOT become directly involved in law
enforcement assault operations. Fire personnel WILL NOT enter an area that is not secure
and/or safe to enter. If the area is not safe, the police department may have to deliver the patients to
Fire personnel at the perimeter. The safety of the scene should continually be assessed by C958 and
any Company/Command Officer that is on scene.
Occasionally, SAU personnel may make special requests for equipment that fire department units have
access to (ladders, TIC cameras, forcible entry tools etc). These requests should be considered on a
case by case basis and units will cooperate if the request is appropriate, after consulting with C958 and
the Battalion Chief.
Should an unexpected event occur (i.e., sudden unexpected gunfire injuring a person), C958 or
Command Officer will request the appropriate additional resource (i.e., additional rescue, 2-1 medical,
etc.). All efforts should be made to ensure that units respond and stage to a safe staging location away
from SAU operations, prior to entering the scene. When feasible, C958 shall also request the response
of additional TLO’s to assist with on scene Intelligence and Operational activities.
Should a planned assault be scheduled by SAU, the appropriate stand by resources should be
requested prior to the assault action. Coordination of these resources should be handled by C958 in
cooperation with the Deployment Battalion Chief.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

POLICE DEPARTMENT SAU OPERATIONS
M.P. 206.09A

03/12-R

Page 4 of 4

Out of Jurisdiction SAU Operations
Due to the fact that Phoenix PD officers have state-wide jurisdiction, Phoenix PD SAU occasionally will
engage in operations (search warrants) outside the City of Phoenix. In the event this occurs, the SAU
Supervisor may request that fire department resources be coordinated with that respective jurisdiction,
utilizing C958 as the Liaison. C958 will make efforts to contact the agency’s TLO (if applicable) and
coordinate the appropriate medical response. C958 has the option to respond with the PD TLO out of
the City to assist with coordinating the fire resources for Phoenix PD SAU. Once an SAU operation is
planned in another jurisdiction and fire resources will be utilized for medical stand by, C958 shall
communicate this to the Deployment Battalion Chief. The respective Command Officer (Operations)
and TLO for that agency should also be contacted and made aware of the operation.
Some SAU operations may also occur outside the reaches of the Valley-Wide Automatic Aid Region,
which is the responsibility of the Phoenix Fire Alarm Room. If SAU operations are planned in these
locales, C958 will advise the SAU supervisor that the standard medical stand by that is normally
available, may not be available in these distant jurisdictions. C958 will still make efforts to contact local
fire/EMS providers and act as a Liaison between SAU and these local agencies. C958 may also
consider placing a medical helicopter (Ranger 41, Native Air etc.) on stand by if feasible. Helicopter
standby will be coordinated between the Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ) and the Phoenix Fire
Alarm Room. In addition, C958 and the AHJ shall work together to establish an appropriate Landing
Zone.
Due to limitations in communications, interoperability and consistency in out of region SOP’s regarding
medical helicopter operations, the responsibility should be upon that of the home fire/EMS agency to
coordinate Command/LZ responsibilities. C958 will continue to function as the Liaison between the
agency and Phoenix PD SAU and assist with direction as conditions dictate. Except in extreme
circumstances (critically injured police officer) and in a designated “secure” treatment sector, C958
should refrain from initiating treatment. Initial medical care should be initiated by the home fire/EMS
agency and when available, Phoenix PD EMT’s assigned to SAU entry teams.
CRITICAL NOTE: It is NOT the standard practice to dispatch and deploy Phoenix Fire
Department ALS/BLS units and rescues outside the Automatic Aid system. Requests for PFD
units to respond outside the Automatic Aid system will be made through the Phoenix Fire
Deployment Battalion Chief along with coordination from the on duty Shift Commanders.
Phoenix PD SAU supervisors should be made aware of limitations when operating under these
conditions and locations.

