PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

AFRICANIZED HONEY BEES

M.P. 206.14

05/21-R

Page 1 of 2

POLICY
The Fire Department does not exterminate bees. The Fire Department will deploy units to rescue
and/or treat victims of an Africanized Honey Bee (AHB) attack. The purpose of this procedure is to
outline a process by which fire companies will approach and manage an AHB attack.
DISPATCH
When the Dispatch Center receives a call for AHB attack, two fire department units (one being an
ALS engine company and one ladder company) and a Battalion Chief should be dispatched. They
shall proceed Code III to the scene and arrive being careful not to commit themselves in the path
of the source of bees, approximately 150 feet from the colony.
ON-SCENE
Upon arrival at an AHB incident site, a rapid evaluation should be made by the first arriving
Company Officer and the following activities implemented:
• Determine if there are any victims which will require rescue and/or medical treatment.
• Designate a Level II staging area for subsequent arriving fire department units and/or other
agencies which are also responding.
Once on the scene, three crew members shall don full structural firefighting personnel protective
equipment (PPE) including SCBA. Ankles and waist should be taped tight to prevent bees from
crawling up the chest or legs. If firefighters have Bee PPE, they may wear this in place of structural
firefighting PPE.
APPROACH
A quick attack 1 ¾ inch hose line shall be pulled by the firefighter at a quick pace towards the
affected patient(s). A fog pattern on the nozzle should be used, sweeping the air surrounding the
firefighters and patient. The patient should be quickly picked up while at the same time sweeping
the surrounding air with the hose line. The hose line should continue to be sprayed to keep the
bees off the firefighters and the patient when retreating to a safe distance approximately 150 feet
from the swarm. At this time, it should be reevaluated if the area retreated to is far enough away
to begin more definitive treatment of the patient. Class A firefighting foam may be used at the
highest concentration possible as it has been found to assist in allowing water to adhere to the
bees.
CLASS B FIREFIGHTING FOAMS CONTAINING PERFLUOROALKYL OR POLYFLUOROALKYL
SUBSTANCES (PFAS) SHOULD NOT BE USED.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

AFRICANIZED HONEY BEES

M.P. 206.14

05/21-R

Page 2 of 2

RECEIPT AND PROCESSING OF CALLS FOR ASSISTANCE
Upon receipt of a call for an AHB incident the call taker shall solicit information from the calling
party to determine appropriate action. Information gathered shall include:
• Location of incident
• Call back number
• Has anyone been stung or is anyone being stung now, and the number of persons involved.
• Is the incident in close proximity (200 feet or less) to a school, day care center or other
building with numerous occupants, especially children?
• Name and address of school, day care center, or other building if applicable.
• Specific location of the bees (i.e., in drain pipe in alley; in barbecue pit in back yard; in mail
box in front of home).
If the incident is in close proximity to a school, day care center, or other building with numerous
occupants, the school principal, day care owner, building manager, etc., shall be contacted and
advised to keep all building occupants indoors and to close all external openings until the AHB
incident is terminated.

