PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

BASEMENT AND BELOW GRADE FIRES
M.P. 202.04B

01/25-N

Page 1 of 5

PURPOSE
The purpose of this procedure is to establish safe and effective expectations for
fire operations (extinguishment, search, and loss control) in occupancies with
basements and/or below grade spaces. Basements and below grade
compartments pose significant threats to firefighters and can have challenging
circumstances that severally limit the ability to extinguish and search those spaces
when experiencing high heat and convective currents. Working on the floor above
a basement fire poses significant threats due to the potential for lightweight
construction and for working in the exhaust portion of the flowpath.
Basement Types
Basement design, location, and access are not standard. Access and ventilation
opportunities are limited, and fuel loads can be extraordinary and unpredictable.
Multiple types of basements exist in the Phoenix region. The 3 standard types
include:
•

•
•

No-access basement
o No external basement access with internal access only
o Root cellars are most common type of no-access basements in older
Phoenix regional occupancies
Limited-access basement
o External window access only, including walk up or lookout basements
Full-access basement
o External door or large escape window access, walkout or daylight
basement

Diagrams representing exterior No-access Basement (left), Limited-access Basement (middle), and Full-access basement
(right). (Courtesy of UL Fire Safety Research Institute)

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

BASEMENT AND BELOW GRADE FIRES
M.P. 202.04B

01/25-N

Page 2 of 5

Basements also are found in 2 distinct construction states. They include:
•

•

Finished
o Provides structural protection to structural floor components with a
potential for livable space (drywall, and interior compartment build
out)
Unfinished
o Provides no protection to structural floor components or livable
spaces

Size up
Early identification of basements and their access opportunities is critical. This
must be considered in the initial onscene size up and a component of the 360° size
up. The presence or lack of a basement must be communicated in the follow up
report. The early communication is necessary to minimize/eliminate the
opportunity for fire crews to end up working above a basement without their
knowledge. The immediate dangers include falling through the floor and working
in the exhaust portion of a flowpath.
The location of the fire in buildings/occupancies with basements is a critical
component of size up. The location and level of the fire in the building must be
recognized and communicated in the follow up, if known. There are multiple
examples of smoke or fire conditions from the exterior that are indicative of a
basement fire. They include:
•
•
•

Full exhaust ventilation at the first-floor entryway (smoking filling the entire
door) without the presence of a neutral plane
Smoke showing from roof vent pipes or a chimney
Below grade window or door opening that is a ventilation intake without
the presence of a neutral plane

Initial and ongoing size up from the most advantageous position(s) should utilize a
thermal imaging camera (TIC). Specific, on-going size up from interior positions
can be critical in locating the fire however is a poor assessment tool in assessing
structural integrity.
When a fire is located at the basement level, fire attack must begin on that level.
That includes basement windows, doors, or stairwells.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

BASEMENT AND BELOW GRADE FIRES
M.P. 202.04B

01/25-N

Page 3 of 5

Determining the ventilation profile is an important part of the initial and ongoing
size up. Determining the air inlets and the smoke/fire exhaust points for the entire
structure improves the effectiveness of the fire attack and minimizes the safety
concerns of firefighters knowingly or unknowingly working within the exhaust side
of a flow path. Multiple serious injuries and deaths to Firefighters have been
experienced when Firefighters have entered the first/ground floor entrances with a
fire in the basement. Changes in the air inlets (ventilation) on the basement level
have created unsurvivable conditions for Firefighters on the first floor with the
exhaust point behind them.
Life safety should be a serious consideration in assessing the fire location, interior
access, and searchable space. An effective fire attack on the basement level is
about extinguishment as well as creating and maintaining searchable space.
Consideration must be given to the structural integrity of the floor joists system
while searching and working on fire control below them.
Risk Management
When a basement is present and conditions are such that there is a likely
basement fire, our actions must reflect good risk management decisions.
Assigning crews to the first floor, above the fire, has significant safety concerns
and should not be done until fire control has been achieved and the smoke has
been ventilated to determine the integrity of the floor sheeting and joists. Thermal
imagers and sounding the floor are not reliable means of determining the
structural integrity of the floor system, especially in buildings using lightweight
construction materials. Rugs and furniture can hide the areas of floor collapse or
areas burned away with no structural supports beneath.
Basement fire external thermal imaging and diagram (Courtesy of the UL Fire Safety Research Institute)

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

BASEMENT AND BELOW GRADE FIRES
M.P. 202.04B

01/25-N

Page 4 of 5

Strategy
The incident strategy, when a basement is present, is dependent on the conditions
and resource capability to extinguish the fire prior to structural failure. An
offensive strategy is appropriate when the fire conditions will allow for fire attack
crews to extinguish the fire in the basement from the most advantageous
position(s) (interior and/or exterior). This extinguishment should be on the same
level as the basement and crews should determine the integrity of the floor joists
separating the basement and the upper floor(s).
A defensive strategy should be considered when crews cannot effectively apply
water into the basement from the most advantageous positions on the same level
of the basement. A defensive strategy should also be considered when there is
limited or zero capability to assess the floor joist integrity separating the
basement and the upper floor(s) or it is known that they are compromised.
It could be considered to change from a defensive strategy to an offensive strategy
once fire control has been achieved and the floor joists are examined, post
ventilation of the basement, to determine the ability to operate on top of the floor
joists.
Action
The most effective incident actions for fires in structures with a basement is to
extinguish the fire from the most advantageous position on the same level as the
fire and to minimize any ventilation prior to extinguishment. If the fire is found to
be in the basement, extinguishment from the most advantageous position(s)
(interior and/or exterior) should be executed prior to Firefighters making entry into
the level above the fire (first or ground floor). The fire attack must be with a
minimum of 150 gpm.
Search operations should be consistent with standard operations based on the
conditions and available resources to extinguish the fire. Search operations above
the fire require the extinguishment of the fire in the basement and the evaluation
of the integrity of the floor joists.
Ventilation should be coordinated prior to and during the fire attack. The creation
or enlarging of a ventilation opening on the basement level can increase the
velocity and pressure of air moving to the floor above, when an exhaust point is
open on the first/ground floor. Any Firefighter working in the exhaust portion of
that flowpath may experience unsurvivable heat conditions when the ventilation

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

BASEMENT AND BELOW GRADE FIRES
M.P. 202.04B

01/25-N

Page 5 of 5

exhaust is not controlled and there is no water on the fire. Ventilation after fire
extinguishment should be in the most effective method for the structure and the
openings. Increasing the number of air exhaust points and/or their size will
increase the velocity and pressure of the ventilation through the structure.
For fires in full-access and limited-access basements, the fire attack position
should be consistent with standard interior or exterior fire control as necessary.
The better the ability to apply water to the interior structural surfaces (walls,
ceiling, floor joist members) the more effective the cooling and extinguishment
will be. Attempting to extinguish the fire by cooling the air and not the surfaces
will be counterproductive and will not be effective.
For fires in no-access Basements, the ability to control the fire from exterior
positions in the most effective manners is minimal or nonexistent. The only
access point to the basement is typically from interior stairs. These interior stairs
will likely become the chimney for exhausting, superheated air/smoke traveling
from the basement to any ventilation openings/exhaust point on the first/ground
floor. The ability to flow water into the basement, onto the interior structural
surfaces from above or from the stairwell is extremely limited. Often water from
above ends up on the floor of the basement and not on the surfaces or materials
that are burning, and the extinguishment is very slow or limited. Using fog
streams or other appliances (Bresnan Distributor, penetrating nozzles, etc.) can be
considered but should not require firefighters to work from above the fire
(dangerous position) and may have minimal or limited success.
Overhaul and Loss control will be dependent on the structural conditions of the
floor joists and the ability operate inside or above the fire compartment.

