PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

ROOF SECTOR

M.P. 202.06

10/24

Page 1 of 5

PURPOSE
This procedure identifies the Roof Sector's responsibilities and objectives. It will also
demonstrate that fireground communication and coordination among all sectors are
paramount for fireground safety when roof operations are underway.
Responsibilities for Roof Sector
Companies assigned to roof sector hold a highly valuable tactical position on the
fireground. This position has multiple responsibilities. They include critical size-up from
an aerial apparatus or on the roof surface as well as the ability to provide coordinated
vertical ventilation, when appropriate. The key functions of a Roof Sector include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Determine roof type and construction materials.
Determine roof integrity.
Determine roof loads and structural features that impact the fire conditions,
extinguishment, and/or search operations.
Determine the presence of an attic space or horizontal void or concealed spaces.
Determine fire extension in common attics, common void spaces, and in difficult
areas to access via interior positions.
Effective, ongoing communication of conditions with the IC, Sector Officers, and/or
Engine Companies working on the interior.
Consideration of ventilation needs and methods.
Coordinate vertical ventilation with the IC, Sector Officers, and/or Engine
Companies working on the interior.
Consider a fire attack from the roof when the fire conditions are challenging or
impossible to reach from the interior or positions on the ground.

Command should consider assigning companies to roof sector during offensive fire
operations to evaluate fire/smoke conditions, roof structural conditions, and to assess the
ability to vertically ventilate. Ladder Companies operating on the roof are in an
advantageous position to provide a size up and information regarding the key elements
of fire extension, building layout/features, endangered exposures, and structural stability.
It may be necessary to establish a Roof Sector in a position remote from the fire-involved
roof to keep a watchful eye on roof conditions, where imminent collapse will occur. Such
a location may be an elevated platform or an adjacent building.
Apparatus placement for Ladder Companies is a critical component. Ladder apparatus
should be strategically placed to allow safe access to the roof, emergency exit from the
roof, and in tactical positions that would permit effective defensive operations, if needed.
In some cases, the ability to access the roof with an aerial device and be in a defensive
position are impossible to do simultaneously (e.g., in big box or multi-story structures).
This needs to be communicated and assessed to determine the most advantageous
action based on incident conditions and the building.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

ROOF SECTOR

M.P. 202.06

10/24

Page 2 of 5

Safe roof operations are paramount. Companies assigned to Roof Sector will be
supervised by the Company Officer who must be with the crew on the roof. Roof Sector
crews must enter the roof from an established safe area and should have a secondary
means of egress to exit the roof, or to a safe refuge on an unexposed and structurally
sound roof surface.
The first personnel reaching the roof must quickly evaluate conditions to ensure the roof
is structurally sound before attempting to work on it. The degree and extent of any signs
of weakness must be considered before committing personnel above the fire. Once on
the roof, the Company Officer/Sector Officer and Firefighters/Engineers must evaluate
their route and progress as they proceed out on the roof. A constant re-evaluation of roof
safety must be maintained throughout roof operations. Time and fire conditions will be
constantly working to weaken the roof.
Commercial vs. Residential
There is a distinct difference in construction design, size, and materials between
commercial and residential roof systems. Roof Sector must be aware of these differences,
which could potentially impact roof operations and interior sectors.
Bowstring Roofs
No firefighter shall operate on or under a bowstring roof if there is any evidence that the
fire has penetrated the attic space involving the trusses or the roof structure in any way.
When the fire involves a room or contents with no evidence of structural extension, a
quick, aggressive, offensive strategy may be appropriate.
Metal Roofs
Buildings with metal roofs have the potential to limit roof operations. Once the Ladder
Company Officer evaluates the roof, the decision to operate on it or not will be
communicated to Command. Ladder Companies will not operate on pitched metal roofs.
Single Family and Duplex - Tile Roofs
No firefighters will operate on the roof to ventilate a single-family or duplex structure fire
covered with concrete or clay roof tiles. It will be necessary to develop a plan for
horizontal or positive pressure ventilation with the fire attack companies and/or
command.
Commercial / Multi-Story, Multi-Family Occupancy Tile Roofs
Should it be necessary for Fire Companies to gain access to the roof for size-up, search
for fire extension, and/or vertical ventilation this is allowable with a clear measurement of
the conditions and appropriate risk management evaluation. Extreme caution must be
used when operating on these types of structures.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

ROOF SECTOR

M.P. 202.06

10/24

Page 3 of 5

Buildings with Photovoltaic Roof Tile
No Firefighter shall operate on the roof of a structure with photovoltaic roof tiles. This
roof material and structure offers electrical hazards and surface hazards that are not
conducive to firefighting activities. As with residential tile roofs, it will be necessary to
develop a plan for horizontal or positive pressure ventilation with the fire attack
companies and/or Command.
Vertical Ventilation
The purpose of ventilation (vertical or other) is to remove super-heated, toxic smoke from
the fire area to improve tenability and the possible survivability of fire victims in
coordination with an effective fire attack. Vertical ventilation can offer the most efficient
form of ventilation of interior heat and gases when it is able to be done in the most
advantageous position. Vertical ventilation directly over the fire compartment is the most
efficient option. It minimizes the drawing of super-heated gases out of the fire
compartment and into uninvolved areas of the structure, further endangering possible
trapped victims.
Vertical Ventilation initially relieves built-up heat and smoke even when conducted ahead
of an effective fire attack. However, this is a temporary improvement period that occurs
and may be followed by a rapid deterioration of conditions if hose line operation on the
fire does not occur at or near the same time. When properly coordinated with fire
extinguishment, vertical ventilation provides a needed and lifesaving benefit throughout
the fire building.
Vertical ventilation is best executed when sequenced simultaneous to and or immediately
following an effective fire attack. Coordination for vertical ventilation simply requires
communication between ventilation companies and fire attack companies. It is the
responsibility of fire attack companies to get water on the fire as quickly as possible from
the best position and to communicate when water is being flowed on the fire and
adequate knockdown has begun. It is the responsibility of ventilation companies to
ensure that water is being flowed onto the fire and that ventilation is needed.
Assumed or un-communicated expectations can place fire victims and Firefighters in
dangerous conditions. Ventilation in any manner will increase the available air in the fire
area and will make the fire conditions worse if not done in concert with effective water
application.
Vertical ventilation will be supervised and executed by fire companies operating in Roof
Sector. The objectives for Roof Sector when engaging in vertical ventilation operations
include:
•
•
•

Roof Sector must monitor the radio at all times.
Determining a safe working surface
Confirm the need for vertical ventilation in the incident action plan.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

ROOF SECTOR

M.P. 202.06
•
•
•
•

•

10/24

Page 4 of 5

Coordinate the sequencing of vertical ventilation with interior fire attack crews.
Complete ventilation cuts to achieve effective ventilation over the fire
compartment.
Consider and coordinate roof fire control operations, as conditions and access
require.
Maintain roof-top monitoring of roof structure and fire conditions; during vertical
ventilation operation and exit the roof as soon as vertical ventilation objectives are
achieved.
Provide progress reports to Command.

When increased vertical ventilation is determined necessary, ventilation holes should not
be made larger. Once a standard-size ventilation hole is cut and cleared, the crews must
move away from that area. In some cases, more than one hole will be required to
sufficiently ventilate the structure. As one hole is opened, the Roof Sector should cut
additional holes a safe distance away. Crews must move from the first hole toward safer
areas with each consecutive ventilation hole. Time, roof structural integrity, and overall
effectiveness are critical factors in the consideration of additional ventilation holes.
Often, it is absolutely not necessary or with the additional risk. This must be coordinated
with Command.
It may be necessary to establish a Roof Sector in a position remote from the fire-involved
roof to keep a watchful eye on roof conditions, where imminent collapse will occur. Such
a location may be an elevated ladder platform or an adjacent building.
Commercial Roof Operations
Vertical ventilation on commercial buildings may not provide effective ventilation in the
same manner as on residential roofs due to the size of the compartments and the volume
of fuel. In non-compartmentalized large commercial structures, Roof Sector may not be
able to cut vertical ventilation holes large enough to positively impact the interior
conditions.
If a compartmentalized space can be identified inside a commercial occupancy and
ventilation is a necessary and reasonable consideration, vertical ventilation may be
warranted. This is conducted in a coordinated manner. In this instance, and when
increased vertical ventilation is determined necessary, ventilation holes should not be
made larger. Once a standard-size ventilation hole is cut and cleared, the crews must
move away from that area. As one hole is opened, the ventilation companies should cut
additional holes a safe distance away, if directly over the fire compartment. Crews must
move from the first hole towards safer areas with each consecutive ventilation hole.
Time, roof structural integrity, and overall effectiveness are critical factors in the
consideration of additional ventilation holes. Often, it is not necessary or worth the
additional risk. This must be coordinated with Command.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

ROOF SECTOR

M.P. 202.06

10/24

Page 5 of 5

Attic Fires
Roof Sector should not consider vertically ventilating attic fires, especially ones that have
ventilation-limited smoke/fire conditions as their initial attack option. This includes fires
that begin in the attic or have extended into the attic. When heavy smoke and heat are
present in the attic space, the source of the fire and the extension into the attic need to be
extinguished at their source. Creating ventilation openings in a ventilation-limited
compartment (attic) can cause the smoke conditions to flash over. A coordinated fire
attack from the roof should be considered if interior crews are unable to apply water to
the attic or ventilation limited space.
Vertical Ventilation Communication
Company Officers managing roof operations must advise Command when ventilation
holes are completed and report on the fire conditions in the structure below the vent hole.
This report should include the following:
•
•

Fire and smoke conditions in the attic and through the vent hole
Any change in the roof conditions and/or structural stability

All Roof Sector personnel shall wear full protective clothing and equipment when
operating above a fire. SCBA face pieces and regulator must be worn while operating
above a fire, and remain in place through the decontamination process, when necessary.

