PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Tactical Objectives
M.P. 202.02A

01/18

Page 1 of 2

Tactical Objectives identify the three separate and critical events that must be completed to
stabilize any incident.
These objectives though separate are interrelated activities which must be dealt with
concurrently. Completion and priority of the objectives is directly correlated to the size up, risk
management and conditions of the incident.
The tactical objectives are as follows:
1. Rescue
2. Fire Control
3. Property Conservation
Rescue ‐ The activities required to protect occupants, remove those who are threatened and to
treat the injured.
Fire Control ‐ The activities required to stop the forward progress of the fire and to bring the
fire under control.
Property Conservation ‐ The activities required to stop or reduce primary or secondary damage
to property.
When each tactical objective is reached the following benchmarks of completion are
announced
Tactical objective
Rescue/ primary search
Fire Control
Property Conservation

Announce Benchmark
‐ All clear
‐ Under control
‐ Loss stopped

All three tactical objectives require somewhat different tactical approaches from a Command
and an operational standpoint.
While Command must satisfy each tactical objective they often occur simultaneously. Notable
examples are the frequent need to achieve interior tenability with active/extensive fire control
efforts before proceeding with primary search, or the need to initiate property conservation
activities while active fire control efforts are being extended.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Tactical Objectives
M.P. 202.02A

01/18

Page 2 of 2

The tactical objectives, (Rescue, Fire Control, Property Conservation) are clear, measurable, and
obtainable objectives. Completion and priority of the objectives is directly correlated to the size
up, risk management and conditions of the incident.
Within the Command framework lies an on‐going responsibility that is not completed with
benchmarks. This is often referred to as the umbrella of service. The umbrella of service is
made up of three on‐going considerations. They are fire fighter safety, customer service, and
loss control.
Customer Service
We recruit members that understand the importance of customer service. We acknowledge
positive customer service actions and look for ways to better serve our customers.

