PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Fireground Strategy
M.P. 202.02B

01/18

Page 1 of 7

Procedure
Structural fireground operations will fall in one of two strategies, Offensive or Defensive.
Fireground strategy is determined and declared by the Incident Commander on all structure fire
incidents. The Incident Command constantly reevaluates the fireground strategy, driven by size
up and risk management.
The Offensive or Defensive strategies are based on the application of the Risk Management
Plan.
1. We Will risk our lives a lot, in a calculated manner, to save SAVABLE lives.
2. We Will risk our lives a Little, in a calculated manner, to save SAVABLE property.
3. We Will Not risk our lives at all for lives or property that are already Lost.
Considering the level of risk, the Incident Commander will choose the proper strategy to be
used at the fire scene.
The strategy can change with conditions or because certain benchmarks (i.e., ALL CLEAR) are
obtained.
The fireground strategy is also based on a reevaluation of the incident size‐up, all Fireground
Factors and reconsideration of risk.
Fireground Factors:








Building
Fire & Smoke
Life Hazard
Occupancy
Arrangement
Resources
Other

Operational Information
The Incident Commander is responsible for determining the appropriate fireground strategy.
Once the appropriate strategy is initiated, it becomes the Incident Commander's job to ensure

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Fireground Strategy
M.P. 202.02B

01/18

Page 2 of 7

that all personnel are operating within the correct strategy. By controlling the fireground
strategy, the Incident Commander is providing overall incident scene safety. The proper
strategy will be maintained by the following actions:




Avoiding simultaneous OFFENSIVE and DEFENSIVE strategies in the same fire area. This
typically happens by first committing personnel to interior positions, then operating
master streams from exterior positions, which places interior crews in danger of injury
or death.
Matching the appropriate strategy to the fire conditions of the structure and minimizing
risk to fire fighters.

Managing fireground strategy must start with the arrival of the first unit and be constantly
monitored and evaluated throughout the entire incident. The initial Incident Commander will
include the fireground strategy in the on‐scene report. As Command is transferred to later
arriving officers, these officers assuming Command must reevaluate the fireground strategy
based on the Risk Management Plan.
Fireground strategy provides a starting point for fireground operations. Once the strategy is
announced, all firefighters know whether to operate on the interior or exterior of the building.
The fireground strategy cannot be a mystery, everyone operating on the fireground must be
operating in the same strategy mode (Offensive or Defensive).
Offensive Strategy

Commercial and residential fires require a thorough size up, assessment of life safety, and
consideration of the Risk Management Plan. Once it is determined that an offensive attack is
safe and appropriate, a smart and deliberate execution of the tactical objectives will be

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Fireground Strategy
M.P. 202.02B

01/18

Page 3 of 7

conducted. The following are guidelines for offensive fire attacks once size up has been
completed and offensive strategy has been determined:
1. Assume Command
2. Address 2 in / 2 out decision prior to entry.

3. Initial attack efforts must be directed toward supporting a primary search. This may
require rescuers to go to obvious victims or to manage the hazard and extinguish the
fire. The first attack line must go where it can best affect this mission and its placement
is dependent upon the variables present on the fireground, determine fire conditions
and extent before starting fire operations (as far as possible). Gather 360° of
information; identify the flow path and the most likely location of the fire and survivable
environments for victims. Search, rescue and fire attack are simultaneous operations.
4. Offensive fires should be fought aggressively, with rapid and effective size up. Quickly
identify conditions in the occupancy and apply the quickest, most appropriate, water to
the fire.
5. Keep the building openings closed if possible to reduce ventilation of the fire until you
have a charged hose line in place and are prepared to make entry.
6. *Before making entry* When possible reset or darken down the fire using a straight
stream applied to the ceiling of the fire compartment. 15‐30 seconds of water applied in
this manner will dramatically reduce temperatures and improve tenability throughout
the occupancy. This tactic must be followed by an aggressive interior attack to complete
fire extinguishment and evacuate any victims.
7. Make every effort to enter the structure at the air intake side of the flow path. You want
the air at your back as you make entry. This will reduce the likelihood of being caught in
the flow path.
8. Co‐ordinate all ventilation of the structure to ensure effectiveness and improvement of
interior conditions.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Fireground Strategy
M.P. 202.02B

01/18

Page 4 of 7

Companies must maintain situational awareness and resist the urge to focus only on the fire
(this is known as the "candle moth" syndrome or "tunnel vision"). In some cases, the most
effective tactical analysis involves an evaluation of what is not burning rather than what is
actually on fire. The unburned portion represents where the fire is going and should establish
the framework for fire control activities and requirements.
Command must consider the most critical direction and avenues of fire extension, plus its
speed, particularly as they affect:





Rescue activities
Level of risk to firefighters
Confinement efforts
Exposure protection

Command must allocate personnel and resources based upon this fire extension/spread
evaluation.
Command must not lose sight of the very simple and basic fireground reality that at some point
firefighters must engage and fight the fire. Command must structure whatever operations are
required to put water on the fire. The rescue/fire control‐extension/exposure problem is solved
in most cases by a fast, strong, well‐placed attack. Command must establish an attack plan that
overpowers the fire with actual water application, either from offensive or defensive positions.
Command must consider the seven sides (or sectors) of the fire: front, rear, both sides, top,
bottom, and interior. Fires cannot be considered under control until all seven sides are
addressed. Failure to address all seven sides will frequently result in fire extension.
Where the fire involves concealed spaces (attics, ceiling areas, construction voids, etc.), it
becomes paramount that companies identify and operate fire streams into such areas. Early
identification and response to concealed space fires will save the building. Officers who hesitate
to gain access to concealed spaces because they don't want to beat up the building may lose
the entire structure.
Early coordinated ventilation is a major support item that must be addressed during concealed
space attacks. Ventilation must be initiated early and be well coordinated with interior crews.
Ventilation openings should be made in the fire area.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Fireground Strategy
M.P. 202.02B

01/18

Page 5 of 7

Command must “get ahead” of the fire. Command must make critical decisions that relate to
cutoff points and develop a pessimistic fire control strategy. It takes a certain amount of time to
get water to a location, and the fire continues to burn while the attack is being set up.
Command must consider where the fire will be when attack efforts are ready to go into
operation; if misjudged, the fire may burn past the attack/cutoff position before resources and
personnel are in position. Do not play "catch up" with a fire that is burning through a building.
Project your set‐up time, write off property and get ahead of the fire. Set up adequately ahead
of the fire, then overpower it.
Write‐off property that is already lost and go on to protect exposed property based on the most
dangerous direction of fire spread. Do not continue to operate in positions that are essentially
lost.
The basic variables relating to attack operations involve:




Location/position of attack
Size of attack
Support functions

Command develops an effective attack through the management of these factors. Command
must balance and integrate attack size and position with fire conditions, risk and resources.
Many times, offensive/defensive conditions are clear cut and Command can quickly determine
the appropriate strategy. In other cases, the conditions are Marginal, and Command must
clearly communicate these conditions.
A Marginal situation is defined as defensive conditions with a known rescue
A Marginal situation has a very short window to affect a rescue or to discontinue the attempt
and begin a defensive fire attack.
Strategy changes can develop almost instantly or can take considerable time. Command must
match the strategy with the conditions. The Incident Commander controls overall incident
scene safety by determining the proper strategy and subsequently the proper tactics to be
used.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Fireground Strategy
M.P. 202.02B

01/18

Page 6 of 7

If the Incident Commander doesn't change strategies from offensive to defensive until the
building is disassembling itself due to structural damage, Command is late in strategy
determination and on the receiving end of the building's decision governing the new strategy to
be employed. Often times when the building gets to make those decisions, fire fighters become
traumatized (physically and/or emotionally). The Incident Commander determines the strategy,
the building should not.
Command needs to constantly evaluate conditions while operating in marginal situations. This
requires frequent and detailed reports from Sector Officers.
It is imperative that Command assign a Roof Sector as early as possible during marginal
situations for rapid evaluation of roof conditions. In certain situations, Command should
strongly consider not committing crews to the interior of a structure unless he/she receives a
report from Roof Sector that the roof of the structure is safe to operate on and under. It is
better to go from an offensive to a defensive strategy too soon rather than too late.
Defensive Strategy
The decision to operate in a defensive strategy indicates that the offensive attack strategy, or
the potential for one, has been abandoned. The elements of an effective defensive strategy
always include:




Identify what is lost
Write it off
Protect exposures

The announcement of a change to a defensive strategy will be made as Emergency Traffic and
all personnel will withdraw from the structure and maintain a safe distance from the building.
Captains will account for their crews and advise their Sector Officer on the status of their crew.
Sector Officers will notify Command of the status of the crews assigned to their sector. A PAR
(Personnel Accountability Report) shall be obtained after any switch from offensive to
defensive strategy.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Fireground Strategy
M.P. 202.02B

01/18

Page 7 of 7

Interior lines will be withdrawn and repositioned when changing to a defensive strategy. Crews
should retreat with their hose lines if safe to do so. If retreat is being delayed because of hose
lines, and it is unsafe to stay in the building, hose lines should be abandoned.
All exposures, both immediate and anticipated, must be identified and protected. The ability to
protect these exposures from any appropriate position must be assessed and coordinated. This
must match the overall strategic level incident size‐up and position in the risk management
plan.
An attempt to control the main body of fire is critical. This may be the best thing to assist in
protection of exposures.
Master streams are generally the most effective tactic to be employed in defensive operations.
For tactical purposes, a standard master stream flow of at least 750 GPM should be the
guideline. Adjustments may be made upward or downward from this figure, but it is very
significant in the initial deployment of master streams.
When the exposure is severe, and water is limited, the most effective tactic is to put water on
the exposure. Once exposure protection is established, attention may be directed to knocking
down the main body of fire and thermal column cooling. The same principles of large volume
water application should be employed.
“FIRE UNDER CONTROL” means the forward progress of the fire has been stopped and the
remaining fire can be extinguished with the on‐scene resources; it does not mean the fire is
completely out. When the fire is brought under control, Command will notify Alarm utilizing the
standard radio report of "FIRE UNDER CONTROL" and alarm will record the time of this report.
Command must initiate a PAR report from all sectors and crews.
If defensive operations are conducted from the onset of the incident, Command will notify
Alarm that there will not be a primary search completed for the affected structure(s).

