PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Air Management
M.P. 202.05C

01/18

Page 1 of 6

Purpose
The following procedure outlines the “Rule of Air Management” to be employed by all
members while operating in the hazard zone of an incident. The practice of working in the
hazard zone until the low air alarm sounds and then leaving is an extremely dangerous
situation.
As firefighters, we are responsible for our own safety and the safety of our fellow firefighters.
The ability to manage our individual air supply and consumption is critical to the safety of every
member working in the hazard zone. A poor decision in air management will adversely affect
the individual firefighter as well as every firefighter involved in attempting to rescue that
firefighter.
History
Historically, most working fires that the Phoenix Regional Dispatch System have responded to
were single and multiple family residences. These structures are typically smaller in size with
easy egress to the exterior. Firefighting in these “typical” residential structures resulted in a
decreased focus on air supply management. When the practice of working until the low air
alarm activates and then exiting is applied to fires at commercial occupancies there can be life
threatening consequences.
The Phoenix Regional Dispatch System has experienced multiple incidents that have involved
air supply emergencies. These incidents have typically ended with a successful intervention and
have not changed the overall approach to air management. After Bret Tarver’s death at the
Southwest Supermarket fire in 2001, the Phoenix Fire Department conducted numerous
training exercises to examine the causes and possible solutions for life threatening emergency
situations during commercial and/or “big box” fires. The exercises concluded that when the low
air alarm is activated, the firefighter can travel less than 150 feet in good conditions until the air
supply is exhausted. In this time, if a firefighter experiences an emergency situation (loses
contact with his/her hose line, becomes entangled in wires, or becomes disoriented) the
possibility of surviving the encounter is significantly reduced.
Rule of Air Management
It is the individual firefighter’s responsibility to be aware of the amount of air in his/her SCBA
and his/her rate of consumption. All firefighters are responsible for managing their own air in
order to leave the hazard zone before the low air alarm activates.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Air Management
M.P. 202.05C

01/18

Page 2 of 6

Firefighters should leave the hazard zone with an emergency reserve, much like ocean divers. It
is critical for firefighters to understand that the last 33% of the air supply in an SCBA is the
emergency reserve. The initial 66% of air supply is the working and exiting air supply. This
includes gaining access, working toward the tactical objectives and leaving the hazard zone. If
an emergency situation is encountered, the emergency reserve (remaining 33%) air supply is to
be used to exit or survive until assistance can arrive. These percentages are appropriate
whether it is 2216psi, 3000psi or 4500psi SCBA bottle. The estimated working time for any SCBA
is dependent on a number of factors. These include the intensity of the work and the fitness of
the firefighter. Each individual firefighter should be cognizant of their air consumption in order
to safely follow this rule of air management.
Company officers must be cognizant their crew’s air consumption. The company officer must
plan for the crew’s exit time based physical exertion, distance required to exit to a safe
atmosphere and the remaining air pressures that are reported by the individual firefighters. It is
the individual firefighter’s responsibility to continually assess and report his/her air
consumption to his/her company officer.
Strategic Level Air Management:
The safety and welfare of all firefighters operating in the hazard zone falls directly to the
Incident Commander. The strategic level of air management is an ongoing process until the
hazard has been eliminated or all firefighters have successfully exited the hazard zone. Air
management is an important critical operating procedure related to the survival of every
firefighter. Although the incident commander is unable to directly manage that survivability
profile, procedures and resources should be utilized to directly support the firefighter’s safety
and welfare.
It is imperative that command continually evaluates the incident using the standard hazard
zone decision making model. Operating in an offensive strategy is the most dangerous position
for firefighters. Air management must be a major factor of that assessment. The ability of
firefighters to exit the hazard zone with a reserve of 33% air is a requirement. If crews are
unable to complete their assigned task with that air supply intact, it is necessary for the incident
commander to provide an adequate number of companies to replace those initial working
crews or change the strategy to defensive.
The strategic level of air management should be managed similarly to the accountability of all
members operating in the hazard zone. Both are managed through position and function within
a command system. Command provides for improved management of firefighter welfare with
early sectorization of the incident. Sector officers should manage the individual sector tactical

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Air Management
M.P. 202.05C

01/18

Page 3 of 6

benchmarks and crew welfare within the sector. Company Officers should manage the welfare
of their crew. Each firefighter is ultimately responsible for his/her own welfare.
The policy of air management for the Regional Operations Consistency Committee (ROCC) is; it
is unacceptable to leave the hazard zone with low air alarms activated during normal
operations.
This policy requires firefighters to leave without using their emergency reserve. This policy will
require that command and sector officers pessimistically forecast the resources required to
complete the tactical objectives in each. Fire crews are less apt to leave an operating tactical
position if there are no crews in position to replace them in the incident operation. It is the
Company Officer’s responsibility to manage the welfare of his/her crew; command must
support these crews with adequate replacement resources. The intent is not to adversely
impact the active firefight, but to strengthen firefighting operations with crews that have safe
air levels. Companies can be assigned only as fast as they arrive. A pessimistic approach would
provide needed replacement crews sooner, thus enabling them to follow the air management
procedures. These resources should be layered in as either working, on‐deck or recycling.
Time is a significant factor in both fire involvement and the air management of crews operating
within the hazard zone. It is impossible for the strategic level to manage the individual
operating times of all sectors or crews operating within the hazard zone. Each sector officer is
required to manage the time crews operate inside the hazard zone within their sector. The
strategic level will manage the entire elapsed time for the incident and the effect time has on
the structure or hazard.
Tactical Level of Air Management
Captain Level Sector Management
In the initial stages of rapidly escalating fire incidents, company officers assume the role of the
initial sector officer and are responsible for the tactical level air management of the sector. The
first Captain to the area will typically remain working with his/her crew and will manage the
tactical objectives for the sector and task level operations for his/her company. As other
companies are assigned to that sector, the initial sector officer will be at a disadvantage in
attempting to manage the welfare (specifically the air consumption) of those crews. The initial
sector officer will need support from all captains in that sector to closely manage their crew’s
air. As the incident escalates, command must assign a tactical level Chief Officer to manage the
sector operations.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Air Management
M.P. 202.05C

01/18

Page 4 of 6

Battalion Chief Level Sector Management
The tactical level of fireground operations has more direct control of individual crew air
management (specifically the air consumption time) than the incident commander. However,
the sector officer is often required to manage the sector operations from just outside the
hazard zone. This requires close management of work cycles and accountability in order to
actively monitor crew air supplies. This is done by the team of the Battalion Chief and the Field
Incident Technician (F.I.T.) or Incident Safety Officer (I.S.O.). Typically, the F.I.T. / I.S.O. will
monitor the work/rest cycles of operating companies within the sector while the Battalion Chief
manages the completion of the tactical objectives. One of the many responsibilities of the F.I.T.
/ I.S.O. includes monitoring the time operating within the hazard zone and providing reminders
to crews of elapsed times on SCBA air.
It is necessary for sector officers to perform their own hazard assessment and apply the
standard decision‐making model within their portion of the overall incident. This assessment
verifies the overall risk management and strategy from the tactical viewpoint. It should also
ensure that the actions within the sector match the strategy and risk management profile of
the overall incident. The sector officer must define where the crews will operate in the building
and what tasks need to be completed. These actions have to be balanced with air management
and a well communicated exit plan.
Sector officers must provide pessimistic reports to command regarding resources needed to
provide uninterrupted work cycles within the sector. This is necessary until the tactical
benchmarks are met within that sector. It is important to have ample crews to provide
immediate relief to crews that have diminished their air supply. This requires maintaining
adequate “on‐deck” resources. Adequate “on‐deck” resources provide crews to cycle into the
hazard zone as well as crews that are ready to react to a “Mayday”. Early forecasting of
necessary resources will provide command with the information needed to establish resource
requirements for the overall incident.
There is no greater concern for sector officers than the welfare of crews working within the
sector. Crew air management is a critical factor in determining the risk management of an
operating sector. If critical fireground factors or the ability to manage air supplies change
negatively, then this should be communicated to command and a re‐evaluation of the strategy
should be conducted.
Task Level Air Management
Individual firefighter air management is the foundation of this air management policy. No
incident command system or structure can overcome a lack of individual firefighter air

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Air Management
M.P. 202.05C

01/18

Page 5 of 6

management. The policy is to leave the hazard zone prior to the SCBA low air alarm sounding.
This leaves an emergency reserve of 33% air capacity if an emergency situation arises.
Firefighting operations, at all levels, should revolve around this standard.
Personal accountability for the SCBA is critical. Firefighters are expected to manage their
assigned SCBA for the entire work shift. This requires thoroughly checking the SCBA prior to
shift, after using it, and whenever the functionality is in question. Firefighters are expected to
know the air level of their SCBA prior to entering the hazard zone, during firefighting activities
and upon leaving the hazard zone. This standard has been known as a “round trip ticket”. The
ability to monitor this supply during firefighting activities is a learned skill/habit. It is necessary
that company officers reinforce the need to adhere to work cycles to their crews. Command
and sector officers should ensure confidence that the work will continue while the relieved
crews are refilling and returning to on‐deck in their sector.
Air management is critical to individual firefighters as well as to their crew and company officer.
The company officer is responsible for the management of air for the entire crew. It is the
responsibility of the individual firefighter to monitor his/her air supply and to communicate this
with the Captain. Captains are expected to be proactive and inquire about the air level status of
their crew. Captains should incorporate the use of triggers to assess their crew’s air supply.
These can be the announcement of the completion of tactical benchmarks, elapsed time
notifications or built in 50% notification alarms on some SCBA manufacturers. The use of
triggers is a learned skill and will require consistent training and practice. Captains can only
address situations that they are aware of. The communication of individual air levels is critical.
Low air emergencies or other mayday events pose an extreme danger to firefighters involved in
rescue efforts. Data obtained from training exercises after the Southwest Supermarket fire
indicates that it takes 12 rescuers to remove one firefighter in a “MAYDAY” situation. The data
also demonstrated that one out of every five rescuers will end up having a “MAYDAY” situation
and require assistance exiting the hazard zone. This creates a deadly cycle. Air management at
all levels of command as well as individual firefighter responsibility is critical in the prevention
of these situations. If members believe themselves or other members to be in this situation, the
call for a “Mayday” should be immediate.
One requirement for a firefighter to be “MAYDAY” ready is that they are able to effectively don,
doff and manipulate the PASS Device and the emergency bypass on their SCBA valve with
gloved hands. This is also a learned skill that is perishable if not trained on consistently. This is
the standard established in NFPA 1500.
Fire crews operating inside structures should always have an “exit plan”. This is not just the
responsibility of the Captain. The Captain should communicate to the crew his/her exit plan.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

Air Management
M.P. 202.05C

01/18

Page 6 of 6

The individual firefighters are responsible for maintaining awareness of the plan and how to
execute the plan. The plan defines how the crew is going to leave their area of operation
(hazard zone). The best plan includes leaving the hazard zone following the hose line out that
you came in on. This includes normal operations as well as emergency situations. The plan
should include the entrance taken into the building, the dedicated hose line, knowledge of
other means of egress within the sector and other crews operating in the sector. This plan also
includes the amount of air it takes to leave the hazard zone prior to the low air alarm sounding.
The larger the building, the more important and difficult the exit plan becomes.
The results of the testing after the Southwest Supermarket has stated that the maximum
distance a fire crew will enter any building is 150 feet without additional support mechanisms
put in place by command. This defines only the distance into the building. This does not
account for the air it takes to maneuver a hand line into this position. The effort required (air
consumption) to place lines in operational positions inside the building is critical to managing
air and time operating inside the hazard zone. Crews and company officers must account for
this effort within their entrance and exit plans from the hazard zone.
There is one air management policy for residential and commercial occupancies of all sizes for
the Regional Operations Consistency Committee (ROCC). Command, sector officers, fire crews
and individual fire department members are expected to manage their air supplies in the same
manner on all types of incidents.

