PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

APPLICATION OF CLASS “B” FOAM/AFFF CONTAINING PFAS
M.P. 204.04A

12/24-N

Page 1 of 5

PURPOSE
The purpose of this MP is to define the circumstances that require the application of Class
B Firefighting Foam/AFFF(Aqueous Film Forming Foam) that contains PFAS.
Not all Class B Foams or AFFF contain PFAS. This MP only refers to the operational use
and responsibilities after application of Class B Foams or AFFF containing PFAS.

DEFINITIONS
A hazardous chemical is any chemical that is classified as a physical or health hazard.
A chemical is a physical hazard if it is likely to burn or support fire.
A chemical is a health hazard if there is significant evidence that acute or chronic health
effects may occur in exposed employees.
Flash point is the minimum temperature at which a liquid gives off vapor in sufficient
concentration to form an ignitable mixture with air near the surface of the liquid.
A liquid is flammable if it has a flash point below 141F.
A liquid is combustible if it has a flashpoint between 140-200F.
Class “B” Foam/Aqueous Film Forming Foam (AFFF) that contains PFAS is typically used
to extinguish highly flammable or combustible liquid class B fires, such as fires involving
fuel tankers (e.g. over-the-road or railroad), aircraft and oil refineries.
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a group of man-made
chemicals. Examples of where PFAS can be found include cleaners, textiles, leather,
paper and paints, fire-fighting foams, and wire insulation.

BACKGROUND:
The Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ) urges Arizona’s fire
departments and emergency responders to take extreme care to minimize the release of
Class B Firefighting Foam/AFFF containing PFAS into the environment. Uncontrolled
release of PFAS to the environment has the potential to create adverse impacts to public
health and the environment if it reaches drinking water, ground water or surface water.
Exposures in the workplace can also occur if skin contact occurs with concentrated
products or through inhalation. Certain PFAS can accumulate and stay in the human
body for long periods of time and there is evidence that exposure to PFAS can lead to
adverse health outcomes in humans.
As of January 1, 2020, Arizona Revised Statute (ARS) § 36-1696 states that no person,
local government, or state agency may discharge or use class B firefighting foam that
contains intentionally added PFAS chemicals for training or testing purposes unless

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

APPLICATION OF CLASS “B” FOAM/AFFF CONTAINING PFAS
M.P. 204.04A

12/24-N

Page 2 of 5

otherwise required by law or conducted at a facility that provides containment, treatment,
and disposal measures that prevent uncontrolled releases into the environment.
The statute does not restrict the manufacture, sale or distribution of class B firefighting
foam containing intentionally added PFAS or the use of the foam in emergency
firefighting or fire prevention operations.
The Code of Federal Regulation’s Occupational Safety and Health Standards within Title
29, Part 1910, Subpart Z, § 1910.1200, requires that employers communicate to its
employees any hazardous chemicals that are known to be present in the workplace, their
associated hazards, how to protect themselves, and provide training in their use.

OPERATIONS
Our Standard Operating Procedures combined with federal and state regulations provide
our department guidance on the use of Class B Firefighting Foam/AFFF containing PFAS
at emergency incidents. We must always begin with the question, “Why are we taking
risks at this incident?”(MP.201.01C, Risk Management and Safety). The critical factors that
are present will help us answer this question by indicating the tactical priorities (MP
202.02A, Tactical Objectives) that must be addressed and assist us in creating an incident
action plan. Critical factors on an incident involving the release of flammable and or
combustible liquids include:
•
•
•
•
•
•

life safety of civilians and that of our members
outside ambient and surface level temperatures
flash point and amount of the product released
if the released flammable liquid has ignited
protection of property that is a potential exposure
soil and nearby storm drains or waterways that are environmental exposures

If a flammable or combustible liquid that is accidentally released has a flash point that is
approaching ambient or surface level temperatures and the amount of product released
threatens life safety or property if ignited, then the application of Class B Firefighting
Foam/AFFF containing PFAS should be considered. If the same liquid ignites, Class B
Firefighting Foam/AFFF containing PFAS should be applied to reduce the products of
combustion. If a large amount (55 gallons or more) of a flammable or combustible liquid
is accidentally released, but there is no threat to life safety or property, then Class B
Firefighting Foam/AFFF containing PFAS should not be applied to the liquid. Application
in this instance produces an unnecessary exposure to personnel and may inhibit the
ability to control the release of hazardous chemicals (both flammable or combustible
liquids and Class B Firefighting Foam/AFFF containing PFAS) into the environment.
Permit Required
Any section that uses Class B Firefighting Foam/AFFF containing PFAS, on an incident,
will be required to complete the use permit, attach a Chemical Reference Worksheet, and
is responsible for the maintenance of the record. A copy of the permit must also be

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

APPLICATION OF CLASS “B” FOAM/AFFF CONTAINING PFAS
M.P. 204.04A

12/24-N

Page 3 of 5

submitted to the Safety and Prevention section to support documentation and tracking of
Toxic Exposure reports from the incident.
Personal Protection and Decontamination
If the decision is made to apply Class B Firefighting Foam/AFFF containing PFAS during
an incident, the following must be addressed,
•
•
•
•
•

•

The Incident Commander must inform all crews that Class B Firefighting
Foam/AFFF containing PFAS is being applied.
Hazard Sector must inform any nearby crews of application.
All personnel operating in the hot zone (MP 204.01, Hazardous Materials) must
wear their turnouts and use their SCBA.
Crews must make every effort to avoid contact with any applied Class B
Firefighting Foam/AFFF containing PFAS.
Members who are outside of the hot zone in a support role and are handling and
supplying open containers of Class B Firefighting Foam/AFFF containing PFAS to
operations personnel in a forward position, must wear personal protective
equipment. This includes a chemical splash protection garment, chemical resistant
gloves, and an N-95 particle mask.
If exposed to Class B Firefighting Foam/AFFF containing PFAS, crews must adhere
to the Fireground Exposure Reduction Policy, MP206.02.

Notifications and Reporting Requirements
The application of Class B Firefighting Foam Class B Firefighting Foam/AFFF containing
PFAS on an incident, will require notifications to C99 and the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality (ADEQ) to coordinate clean-up and remediation. The Safety and
Prevention section must also be contacted to initiate a Toxic Exposure Notification.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

APPLICATION OF CLASS “B” FOAM/AFFF CONTAINING PFAS
M.P. 204.04A

12/24-N

Page 4 of 5

REFERENCES
29 C.F.R. § 1910.1200, Hazard Communication.
A.R.S. § 36-1696, Firefighting foam; prohibited uses; exception; definitions.
Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ). (2023). AFFF Resources.
https://www.azdeq.gov/afffresources#:~:text=The%20discharge%20or%20use%20of,prohibited%20by%20Arizona%2
0state%20law.
Barragan, A. (2024, Jan 18th). Personal communication [phone interview].
National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health. (2024). Per-and polyfluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS). Center for Disease Control and Prevention.
https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/pfas/default.html#:~:text=Per%2D%20and%20polyfluoro
alkyl%20substances%20(PFAS),Print&text=PFAS%20is%20often%20a%20component,suppression%20of%20liquid%20fuel
%20fires.&text=U.S.%20workers%20in%20certain%20industries,PFAS%20than%20the%20
general%20public.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration. (2024). Definitions. Code of Federal
Regulations. https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-49/subtitle-B/chapter-I/subchapter-C/part173/subpart-D/section-173.120
Occupational Safety and Health Administration. (2024). Hazard Communications. Code of
Federal Regulations. https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-29/subtitle-B/chapter-XVII/part1910/subpart-Z/section-1910.1200
US Fire Administration. (2020). The Hidden Dangers in Firefighting Foam. The hidden
dangers in firefighting foam (fema.gov)

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

APPLICATION OF CLASS “B” FOAM/ AFFF CONTAINING PFAS
M.P. 204.04A

08/24-N

Page 5 of 5

Application of Class "B" Foam/AFFF Use Permit
Date:
Incident Number:

Phoenix Fire Department
Address:

RP Information:
Product Information:
Critical factors to consider on an incident involving the release of flammable and or
combustible liquids include:
Is there a risk to Life safety of civilians and that of our members?
Surface Temp:

Outside ambient and surface level temperatures

Air Temp:
Flash Point:

Flash point and amount of the product released

Amount Released:

Has the released flammable liquid has ignited?
Is there a risk to property that is a potential exposure?
Is soil and nearby storm drains or waterways environmental exposures?
If the decision is made to apply Class B Firefighting Foam/AFFF containing PFAS during an
incident, the following must be addressed:
The Incident Commander has informed all crews that Class B Firefighting Foam/AFFF
containing PFAS is being applied
Hazard Sector has informed nearby crews of application
All personnel operating in the hot zone are wearing their turnouts and their SCBA
Members that are outside of the hot zone and are handling and supplying class B
foam to operations personnel in a forward position, are wearing personal protective
equipment that includes a chemical splash protection garment, chemical resistant
gloves, and an N-95 particle mask
If exposed to Class B Firefighting Foam/AFFF containing PFAS, crews are adhering to
our Fireground Exposure Reduction Policy, MP206.02.
Phoenix Crews Assigned:
Gallons of Foam Concentrate Used:
Incident Commander:
Signature:
Hazard Sector:
Signature:

