PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

MASS CASUALTY RESPONSE AND REUNIFICATION
M.P. 206.23

04/24-N

Page 1 of 2

PURPOSE
The purpose of this procedure is to establish the roles and responsibilities during a mass
casualty incident (MCI). It is at the discretion of the initial Incident Commander (IC) to determine
what constitutes a “mass casualty” incident. Upon recognition of an MCI, the initial IC will declare
to the alarm room the appropriate MCI alert, which will automatically activate additional internal and
external resources to support the incident.
DEFINITIONS
MCI 1- This designates an incident that requires a large number of resources to a primary scene,
i.e. a structure collapse. An MCI 1 will deploy a second alarm and MMRS to the scene.
MCI 2- This designates an incident that requires a large number of resources to a primary scene
and also to surrounding hospitals to assist with expected surge, i.e. active shooter/active threat.
An MCI 2 will deploy a second alarm and MMRS to the primary scene and one advanced life
support (ALS) unit and command vehicle (if available) to the three closest hospitals in perimeter
to the incident.
MCTRAC- Mass Casualty Tracking Reunification Arizona Collaborative. This collaborative is
made up of local, county, state, federal, and public and private partners to support all functions of
mass casualty response and reunification.
RESPONSIBILITIES
Initial IC: Establish command, determine the resource deployment needs based on a rapid initial
scene size-up, and request the appropriate MCI alert (MCI 1 or MCI 2). The MCI alert will
automatically activate additional internal and external resources to support the entire incident.
Responding Fire Companies: In mass casualty incidents, fire companies may be assigned to the
primary scene where the incident occurred or may be dispatched to local emergency rooms to assist
in patient triage and care. A triage may not be completed at the primary scene based on type,
magnitude, or complexity of the incident. Emergency medical services (EMS) roles and
responsibilities in an MCI 1 and MCI 2 are established in M.P. 203.01.
Dispatcher: Activate an MCI “pre-alert” based on preliminary law enforcement dispatch center
information. The MCI “pre-alert” will be sent to the MCI group text established in CAD and
includes all hospitals, emergency managers, and the Office of the Medical Examiners (OME). Upon
establishment of command by the initial IC, a “confirmation alert” with scene size-up information
will be sent to the MCI group to stand up all appropriate resources.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

MASS CASUALTY RESPONSE AND REUNIFICATION
M.P. 206.23

04/24-N

Page 2 of 2

Lead Dispatcher: Deploy the appropriate MCI deployment package requested by IC.
Emergency Manager: The Emergency Manager (EM) will activate the Emergency Operations
Center (EOC). Activation of the EOC requires notification to the Maricopa County Department of
Emergency Management’s (MCDEM’s) Duty Officer. The EM will provide contact information for
the Local Reunification Coordinator and the location for the family reunification center site to
MCDEM. MCDEM will activate the deployable reunification team to respond with the information
provided by the EM. All reunification efforts will be the responsibility of the EM with support
from internal and external partners established through MCTRAC.
POST INCIDENT MENTAL HEALTH
MCI incidents take an extreme toll on the general public and first responders. Mental health needs
should be assessed continuously during and after an MCI. Activation of crisis response teams will
be included with the MCI group’s “confirmation alert” and the deployable reunification team.
Mental health services should be used for victims, volunteers, and first responders to assist with
long-term recovery.

