PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

MUTUAL AID RESPONSE AND OPERATIONS
M.P. 205.17

11/24-R

Page 1 of 7

PURPOSE
The purpose of this procedure is to provide a standard and acceptable practice for
all Phoenix Regional Automatic Aid Partners with Mutual Aid assistance to fires,
medical emergencies, hazardous materials incidents, technical rescues, and other
types of emergency incidents that are within the scope of services provided by the
partner fire departments with written formal agreements.
DEFINITIONS
Mutual Aid is defined as, any Fire Department emergency response and/or
incident mitigation assistance provided by one jurisdiction to other jurisdictions
when no formal Automatic Aid agreement has been instituted. Any Mutual Aid
assistance provided will be the result of a formal request for assistance from one
jurisdiction to the other jurisdiction. Requests for mutual aid can be refused by
any requested agency.
AUTHORITY
When Mutual Aid assistance is provided, the Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ)
remains ultimately responsible for the incident and must provide incident support.
An AHJ is recognized as municipal, county, or state division of government (Fire
Departments) or taxing authority (Fire Districts) granted the responsibility to
respond to emergency incidents involving fire, emergency medical, hazardous
materials, and technical rescue within their geographical boundaries. For
emergency transportation, an AHJ is the public or private entity that has been
granted the responsibility to respond for emergency transportation (ambulance)
to their assigned geographical area and meet the standards defined by their
Arizona State Department of Health Services Certificate of Necessity (CON).
PROCEDURE
It is understood that a jurisdiction or area outside of the Regional Metropolitan
Phoenix Automatic Aid Response System may exceed its response capabilities.
When the Fire Chief or their designee determines that assistance is needed to
mitigate an emergency incident within their jurisdiction, a request for assistance
can be made.
Currently the Phoenix and Mesa Regional Dispatch Centers provide dispatching
services for some departments that are not members of the Automatic Aid

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

MUTUAL AID RESPONSE AND OPERATIONS
M.P. 205.17

11/24-R

Page 2 of 7

System. In these cases, the respective dispatch center acts as those agencies’
designee when requesting mutual aid assistance.
For assistance from agencies outside of the Phoenix and Mesa Regional Dispatch
Centers, the requesting agency will make the necessary request to the respective
dispatch center for approval and potential dispatch.
The mutual aid system is designed for fire suppression, emergency medical
services, hazardous materials, and technical rescue response in hazard mitigation
and/or life safety responses with respective departmental/district resources that
have approval to respond.
The mutual aid system should incorporate emergency transportation (ambulance)
in the case of crisis or severe shortage with a special consideration that this is
governed differently. Ambulance coverage is based upon State of Arizona
Department of Health Services CON for geographical areas. Not all fire
departments/districts are CON holders and do not have the authority to share
ambulance resources. In the cases of mutual aid requests for ambulances, the
CON holder shall be contacted by the respective dispatch center for the necessary
approval to respond.
When a request for assistance is made, the following process must be followed:
1. The requesting jurisdiction or designee dispatch center will contact the
requested Dispatch to request assistance. The request must include the
type of incident, the type and number of resources being requested, the
current number of resources assigned to the emergency incident, and the
current location of the incident commander (if currently on scene).
2. Upon receipt of the information, the respective dispatch center will
determine the closest appropriate supporting jurisdiction and/or ambulance
CON holder to fulfill the request. Upon that determination, the respective
dispatch center(s) will contact the on duty, official contact of the proposed
supporting jurisdiction to obtain approval to dispatch requested resources.
3. The following critical criteria will be utilized by the Fire Chief or their
designee to determine if a response is possible:
•
•

What is the incident type and nature?
What is the immediate or foreseeable Life Hazard?

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

MUTUAL AID RESPONSE AND OPERATIONS
M.P. 205.17

•

•
•

11/24-R

Page 3 of 7

Has the responsible agency dispatched resources to the
incident? If so, what is their estimated time of arrival to the
incident?
Is a different jurisdiction closer that can provide the requested
support? If so, refer the request to that jurisdiction.
What capacity remains to protect their response area?

4. After thoroughly assessing the above criteria, the on-duty contact will make
a determination to fully support, partially support, or deny the Mutual Aid
request. Upon this determination, the supporting jurisdiction’s Shift
Commander or Battalion Chief will advise Dispatch and Deployment of the
level of response that will be provided. A 3&1 assignment will be the
minimum deployment for a Structure fire or any fire with a report of people
trapped.
5. If assistance is provided, the respective dispatch center will immediately
dispatch the determined resources and notify the requesting jurisdiction of
the status of their request for assistance.
•

This procedure does not govern Statewide Mutual Aid requests or the
deployment of the Rapid Response Task Force.

•

If an Automatic Aid partnering agency elects to respond to a mutual aid
request, that is the sole responsibility of the accepting jurisdiction. Additional
requests from the responding jurisdiction should come from within the
responding jurisdiction first. Any requests for additional aid made by a
responding automatic aid participant that would include a response from
additional AA partners must be coordinated through the regional dispatch
center and the shift commander of the requested agency.

•

Automatic Aid Participants will not be held liable in any way for the
determination to supply or not to supply, or to limit the level of response
supplied.

•

Automatic Aid is defined as the reciprocal extension of participating fire
departments, through an Intergovernmental Agreement, where resources are
merged into an integrated system with standardized training and standard
operating procedures (SOP). Automatic aid includes a “total boundary drop”
where participating jurisdictions operate as though they were a single fire
department.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

MUTUAL AID RESPONSE AND OPERATIONS
M.P. 205.17

11/24-R

Page 4 of 7

•

Enhanced Mutual Aid is defined as those areas where neighboring fire
departments agree to deploy resources automatically in a specific area without
prior approval.

•

Unincorporated Emergency Service Area is defined as a region of land that
does not have provisions for emergency service delivery, except for law
enforcement services.

•

Requests for assistance by Private Fire & Emergency Service provider (RMFD)

ENHANCED MUTUAL AID
Enhanced mutual aid has been defined as an agreement between two agencies
(typically 1 auto aid agency and 1 mutual aid agency) that does not require
approval to send resources to assist in an incident. The recipient is typically a
mutual aid jurisdiction requiring specific or general assistance with fire,
emergency medical, technical rescue, and/or hazardous materials response.
An enhanced mutual aid agreement between two agencies does not bind the
remaining automatic aid agencies to this agreement. Any other assistance
required outside of enhanced mutual should go through the standard mutual aid
request process.
UNINCORPORATED EMERGENCY SERVICE AREA
It is often unreasonable to determine if a call for emergency services is inside an
unincorporated area. As a result, any call for emergency services within a county
island, will be dispatched without approval and the closest most appropriate
unit(s) deployed to a type of call where an imminent threat to life is presumed as
follows:
1. Structure fire or any fire with a report of people trapped.
2. Critical EMS incidents (Codes, Childbirth, Choking person, child or infant,
Drowning, ALS Seizure).
No area is absent of law enforcement jurisdiction, and all area/bordering law
enforcement agencies provide mutual support for the Phoenix Regional Automatic
Aid System. Therefore, units will be deployed to rescue/provide emergency

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

MUTUAL AID RESPONSE AND OPERATIONS
M.P. 205.17

11/24-R

Page 5 of 7

medical services to law enforcement officers automatically in unincorporated
areas regardless of distance. Alarm Room personnel should coordinate with nonauto aid dispatch centers with the intent of providing the timeliest response.
REQUESTS FOR ASSISTANCE BY PRIVATE FIRE & EMERGENCY SERVICE
PROVIDER (RMFD)
Rural Metro Fire Department (RMFD) is a private corporation that contracts and
sells individual fire service subscriptions in both incorporated and unincorporated
areas of Maricopa County. It is important to note that RMFD is not a governmental
agency and is NOT an Authority Having Jurisdiction. In addition, it is impossible
for the automatic aid system to know who is serviced by RMFD. As a result, a
request to assist RMFD, will be dispatched without approval and the closest most
appropriate unit(s) deployed to a type of call where an imminent threat to life is
presumed as follows:
1. Structure fire or any fire with a report of people trapped.
2. Critical EMS incidents (Codes, Childbirth, Choking person, child or infant,
Drowning, ALS Seizure).

Any request made that does not involve an imminent threat to public life safety
(defensive structure or vegetation fire for example) will be deferred to the shift
commander of the requested agency for approval as outlined in the Mutual Aid
Procedure section above.
PARAMETERS FOR ON-SITE OPERATIONS BY ASSISTING JURISDICTIONS
1. Mutual Aid units will use every effort to support the on-site Incident
Commander in a positive manner.
2. Assisting resources will always operate under the incident command
standards as documented by Volume II, including the functions of
command and strategic decision making.
3. Interoperable communications must be available. Crews will not operate in
the hot zone without uninterrupted communications and connection to a
dispatch center.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

MUTUAL AID RESPONSE AND OPERATIONS
M.P. 205.17

11/24-R

Page 6 of 7

4. The first arriving Company/Command Officer from the assisting resources
will establish communications with the Incident Commander. If there is no
command structure established, the first arriving Company/Command
Officer will facilitate the implementation of an ICS utilizing a Unified
Command with the AHJ. Implementation will include the appropriate
incident organization as needed. If the AHJ is unable to support a Unified
Command Structure the initial arriving company or command officer will
establish command and become the incident commander.
5. Company/Command Officers will use the Strategic Decision-Making Model
to determine the following:
•
•
•
•

•

•

On arrival, what is the current situation and what are the factors
present and forecasted?
Is life safety a critical factor, that would require working in the hot
zone?
Does the current incident strategy match the current and forecasted
conditions and critical factors?
Are there enough resources on scene and/or responding to complete
the tactical objectives (all clear, under control, loss stopped) based on
the incident conditions?
Do all mutual aid resources have the ability to communicate on the
fireground with each other and with the Phoenix or Mesa Dispatch
Center on the hazard zone radio channel?
Are their treatment and transportation resources available and
present for firefighter injuries?

6. Ladder companies are a limited resource. Therefore, Command Officers
should consider whether a Ladder Company response is necessary and/or
appropriate.
7. Special Operations are a limited resource. Therefore, Command Officers
will review the availability status before making an approval to any
request.
8. Direct tactical radio communication with the Phoenix or Mesa Dispatch
Center is required if mutual aid resources are going to be working in the
hazard zone. This is necessary to ensure a dispatch center tactical radio
operator (TRO) is monitoring hazard zone radio traffic and can implement
Mayday procedures and resources should the need arise.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

MUTUAL AID RESPONSE AND OPERATIONS
M.P. 205.17

11/24-R

Page 7 of 7

9. For incidents that do not have direct tactical radio communication with the
Phoenix or Mesa Dispatch Center, mutual aid resources shall not work in
the hot zone and work to support the AHJ resources with work from outside
of the hazard zone.
10. Breathing apparatus will be refilled by Utility Trucks from Automatic Aid
cities only.
11. Injured or ill Firefighters will be transported by fire department operated
Ambulances whenever possible.
12. The Command Officer will update the respective dispatch center with
progress reports at appropriate points throughout the incident.
13. Assisting resources will be released from the incident as soon as conditions
warrant, or the local jurisdiction has arrived and is ready to act. All overhaul
operations will be completed by the requesting jurisdiction.

OPERATIONAL PERIODS GREATER THAN 12 HOURS
Any requests for assistance greater than 12 hours will be governed by the
Arizona Statewide Mutual Aid Plan.

