PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

TRIAGE SECTOR

M.P. 203.02

11/24-R

Page 1 of 3

PURPOSE
The purpose of triage is to identify the number of patients, categorize them based on the
severity of their injuries, prioritize their need for treatment and transportation needs, and
stabilize life-threatening injuries until additional resources arrive on the scene.

POLICY
Triage can be used on any sized incident at the discretion of the incident commander. If the
number of immediate patients exceeds the available resources for appropriate treatment,
Rapid Assessment of Mental status and Pulse (RAMP) triage should be implemented to sort
the patients. If either Command or Triage Sector determines the need for RAMP, emergency
traffic should be declared so that all responding and on-scene units know RAMP is being
utilized.
Triage, extrication, treatment, and transportation sectors can be assigned separately, which
clearly distinguishes between 4 important distinct functions. Each sector can be assigned as
needed based on the incident:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Triage: Identifying patient number and severity.
Extrication: Victim disentanglement and removal to a treatment area.
Treatment: Assess, treat, and prepare for hospital transport.
Transportation: Continued treatment and care through emergency transport to the
hospital.

Triage Sector Responsibilities
The following items represent the standard operations that will be performed by the Triage
Sector officer:
1. Determine the location, number, and condition of patients.
2. Request additional resources from Command based on patient needs.
3. When triage is complete, provide Command with a “Triage Report”. A Triage
Report should include the number of immediate and delayed patients.
4. Determine, in close coordination with Extrication Sector, if triage will be performed in
place or at the entrance to the treatment area and communicate the plan to
command.
5. Assign and supervise triage teams.
6. Conduct patient triage based on RAMP triage, ensuring that life-saving emergency
medical care is provided as needed (i.e., placing tourniquets), and that patients are
accounted for with triage tape appropriately (right arm).
7. Provide frequent progress reports to Command.
8. Coordinate activities with other sectors. (extrication, treatment, transportation)
9. Terminate triage activities and inform Command that personnel are available for
reassignment.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

TRIAGE SECTOR

M.P. 203.02

11/24-R

Page 2 of 3

As a general rule, patients should be triaged and tagged with triage tape before being moved
to a treatment area. IMMEDIATE patients are moved first, followed by DELAYED patients.
Dead/Dying patients should be reassessed as more resources become available. If not
breathing after lifesaving interventions, they are considered dead and can be left in place. If
there is an immediate threat to the patients or responders, triage can be performed after the
patients are moved to a safe area. If already triaged, Dead/Dying patients should be left in
place and resources should move more viable patients to a safe location. Dead/Dying patients
should be reassessed once the threat is mitigated, and responders can safely reenter the area.
Depending on the safety of the site and the arrangement of the patients, it may be necessary
to triage patients at the entrance to the treatment area.
In a very large incident, it may be necessary to establish multiple triage locations. Regardless
of where triage is performed, the triage process requires close coordination between the
extrication and treatment sector officers.
Triage Report
Once triage is complete, the Triage Sector Officer then radios Command with a Triage Report.
The Triage Report includes the number of patients, their classification, and any pertinent
information (pediatric/adult, burns, chemical exposure, etc.). For example, a Triage Report at
a multi-vehicle collision may sound like: “Triage to Command. Triage is complete. We have 13

total patients: 6 IMMEDIATES, 4 pediatric and 2 Adults, 3 DELAYED, and 4 MINOR INJURIES.”

After the Triage Report, the TRO will update all responding crews the size of the incident.
Completion of triage is an EMS tactical benchmark and will be tracked by the dispatch center.
Triage provides Command with essential information regarding decisions to call for additional
resources or to scale back the response. Once triage is complete, Command may reassign
triage crews to other functions.

PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

TRIAGE SECTOR

M.P. 203.02

RAMP Triage

11/24-R

Page 3 of 3

