PHOENIX REGIONAL
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES
Policy Name:
Policy Number:
PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATIONS
M.P. 205.20B
This policy is for internal use only and does not expand an employee’s legal duty or civil
liability in any way. This policy should not be construed as creating a duty to act or a higher
duty of care, with respect to third party civil claims against employees or the Phoenix Fire
Department (PFD). Remedies for violations of this policy, if proven, are limited to
administrative disciplinary action against PFD employees.
Related Policies: 205.20, 205.20A, 202.19, 202.19A
Other Reference:
Date Implemented: 04/2023-R
Review Date: 04/2028
PURPOSE
This procedure will establish a standard approach and response to Photovoltaic (PV) installations.
POLICY
It is the policy of the Central Arizona Life Safety System Response Council to respond to reports
of emergencies in facilities that have PV systems. Our objective is to provide for life safety and
reduce property damage when and where it’s safe to do so. It is important to note that because of
the significant hazard they present, PV installations will change the way we operate in facilities
that have them. Firefighters must recognize the existence of the PV installations early in an
incident and know the associated hazards.
PHOTOVOLTAIC SAFETY AWARENESS
PV systems are electrical generators. Photovoltaic arrays generate electricity by converting light
energy into electrical energy. These systems are always generating electricity within the modules
when they are exposed to light. Grid-tied systems can have electricity back feeding into the
invertor until the disconnects are operated.
Photovoltaic Systems are found in residential, commercial and utility installations. All these
systems represent a potential electrical shock hazard. Monsoon storms, hail, exposure to fire, or
vandalism can create damage to the system which may cause electrical faults. These electrical
faults may create a hazardous condition that can override the designed safety systems.
Firefighters should use extreme caution when approaching PV systems and the structures they
are found on.

PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATIONS
Page 1 of 5

DANGERS OF PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEMS
PV systems create Direct Current (DC) that must be converted to Alternating Current (AC) for use
in the electrical grid; this is done through an inverter. Depending on the type of PV installation and
the occupancy, the expected voltages produced are as follows:
•
•
•

Residential: Up to 600 Volts DC
Commercial: Up to 1000 Volts DC
Utility Installations: Up to 1500 Volts DC
o Utility substations or power generating stations should not be entered and water
streams should not be applied.

Note: Once converted through an inverter 1500 volts of DC current becomes 35,000 volts of AC
current.
Emergencies involving PV installations and associated equipment contain hazards unique to
electrical systems. This includes an electrocution hazard, toxic products of combustion, and
thermal burns from electrical arcing. PV installations may consist of the PV cell, multiple cells
mounted into a module, multiple modules mounted into an array, invertors, disconnects and
electrical conduit. Some installations may have a Battery Energy Storage System (BESS).
The presence of a Photovoltaic array represents an increased dead-load on the roof structure. The
impacts of this load shall be considered during operations.
Emergency Procedures for Residential BESS systems.
When a PV system is identified it is critical to evaluate the system to determine if there is a BESS
as part of the installation. Once identified the following steps shall be taken:
• Notify Command, the assignment shall be upgraded to a 3-1 Hazardous Materials
Response, isolate the area.
• It is critical to operate electrical disconnects if it is safe to do so. This will isolate the battery
system.
o After operation of the electrical disconnects it is important to recognize that the
batteries will still pose an electrical hazard due to the stranded energy that they
contain.
• Crews will wear full PPE with SCBA Face Piece in place
• A charged hose line will be in place (1 ¾" or larger shall be used).
• Isolate the area surrounding the residential BESS a minimum of 40 feet. Hazardous
Materials crews will set a hot zone.
• Avoid parking apparatus directly in front of the house
• Evaluate if the Battery Pack has been impacted by the initial fire or other event

PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATIONS
Page 2 of 5

•
•

•
•
•

•
•

•

Contact vendor-specific technical support for assistance including battery management
system (BMS) data.
Consider an extended monitoring / cooling period of 12 hours in which the battery is
monitored for signs of thermal runaway. This is a passive cooling period without water
being applied.
o Direct application of water is ineffective for cooling a battery to prevent a thermal
runaway reaction. The construction of the battery pack prevents water from
reaching the involved cells.
o Temperature readings should be taken as early as possible and repeated at regular
intervals (10 minutes) to identify trends. Is the battery getting hotter or beginning to
cool?
Water spray is the preferred agent for response to lithium-ion battery fires (Lithium-ion is
not water reactive).
Protect exposures through defensive firefighting.
The Responsible Party must arrange for proper disposal and cleanup. The disposal
company must be licensed/permitted to transport and dispose of damaged lithium-ion
batteries.
Contact the RP. They will be informed that they must contact the manufacturer for technical
support.
Command Officers shall make attempts to notify the building owner or occupant that there
is a risk associated of a secondary event including fire as a result of continued power
generation from the PV panels.
Command or their designee may make notification over the radio that this notification has
been made.

Hazardous compounds are used in the manufacturing process to make the cells. If panels are
involved in fire, PPE including SCBA shall be worn. Exposure reduction through on scene
decontamination shall be utilized.
Disconnects must be utilized to isolate the PV system from the electrical grid and BESS if present.
It is important to note that some components of the system may continue to hold energy, this
concept is called stranded energy and can represent a potential source of injury. PV panels or
modules can be covered with opaque tarps to stop the generation of electricity if safe to do so.
Building integrated PV roofing tiles or shingles are unique in that they serve as the finished roof
and generate electrical energy. This type of roof system not only has the electrical hazard
associated with it, but they are extremely slippery and represent a fall hazard. Roof operations
shall not be conducted on a building integrated PV tile or shingle roof.
When addressing concealed spaces including the attic, consider that electrical wires coming from
the PV panels may be energized. It’s possible for the aluminum frames of panels and the metal
PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATIONS
Page 3 of 5

components of mounting racks to become charged if the system has sustained physical damage.
Avoid contact with these components.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE PROCEDURES
Firefighters should identify the presence of PV installations early in the incident. Indicators that a
PV installation is present are as follows:
• Visible array of PV panels
• Conduit coming from roof
• Invertors mounted on a wall or the ground next to building electrical panel
• Signage found around the electrical system
The presence of a PV installation shall be announced on the tactical radio channel and
acknowledged by Command. It is critical that everyone on the fireground is aware of the presence
of a PV installation. For example, interior companies must be aware of the potential for live
electrical power to be still active in the attic and roof operations may not be possible depending
on the layout of the PV array.
When a PV installation is present in a residential or commercial application, and when safe to do
so, all disconnects should be operated to electrically isolate the system. In order to fully secure
utilities to the structure firefighters should address the following:
• De-energize power coming into the building from utility company.
• De-energize electrical circuits leading from the PV system.
• Operate the rapid shut down switch to isolate the DC power for the PV system and confine
the power to the array.
o Older systems may not have this “rapid shut down switch” function and deenergizing procedures above will leave the circuit from the array to the disconnect
fully energized.
• Evaluate the structure for the presence of a BESS and operate the disconnect if possible.
If a Responsible Party (RP) is available attempt to obtain information about the system and inquire
if the PV installation includes a BESS. Direct the RP to contact their installer to respond to assess
and mitigate hazards associated with the system.
FIRE IN THE PV ARRAY (RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL)
If the PV array is involved in fire, it’s possible to use water to extinguish the fire after the electrical
disconnects have been operated. A fog pattern delivered at a minimum of a 10-degree pattern
from a minimum distance of 20 feet away will provide for the safe application of water on a PV
array. This tactic may only be employed on PV installations up to 1000 volts. Most residential and
commercial PV systems generate less than 1000 volts. This tactic may not be employed on high
voltage utility PV installations.

PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATIONS
Page 4 of 5

As the PV Panel burns the material can liquify and can follow the path of least resistance. This may
extend the fire non-typically and cause extension below the panels and in the structure. Overhaul
efforts must address this risk.
PV installations are becoming common in parking lots for electrical generation and to provide
covered parking. It’s critical in the event of a car fire in one of these systems to operate the
electrical disconnects that feed the system. These systems are an example of where the decision
to apply water to the panels may need to be made. It is mandatory to operate the disconnects
prior to the application of water. These installations represent a unique hazard as the modules are
overhead.
PHOTOVOLTAIC GENERATING STATIONS (UTILITY SUBSTATIONS)
In large utility substation events, we will not engage in any activities related to fire suppression
inside the facility. We will simply isolate the area. All fire department personnel will remain outside
the fence line and protect exposures as needed. Careful coordination with the proper utility
company representatives is required before any action may be considered

PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATIONS
Page 5 of 5

