November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

IS-0100.c: An Introduction
to the Incident Command
System, ICS 100

Student Manual
Date Released: 11/2018

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-1

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Contents
Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview .............................................................. 3
Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics .............................................................. 42
Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles ......................................... 75
Lesson 4: General Staff Roles .................................................................................... 111
Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You ............................................................................. 140

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-2

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS
Overview

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-3

November 2018

Visual 1:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Course Welcome

This course will introduce students to the Incident Command System (ICS). This system
is used nationwide to manage incidents regardless of size or type.
This is the first in a series of ICS courses for all personnel involved in incident
management. Descriptions and details about the other ICS courses in the series may be
found on our web site: http://training.fema.gov.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-4

November 2018

Visual 2:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Course Goal

The overall course goal is to promote effective response
by:
•
•

Familiarizing you with the Incident Command System
(ICS) and the NIMS principles used to manage
incidents.
Preparing you to coordinate with response partners
from all levels of government and the private sector.

IS-100.c provides information on ICS which is part of
the National Incident Management System (NIMS). To
learn more about NIMS following completion of this
course, you can take IS-700.b: An Introduction to the
National Incident Management System.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-5

November 2018

Visual 3:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Overall Course Objectives

At the completion of this course, you should be able to:
•
•
•
•
•

Explain the principles and basic structure of the
Incident Command System (ICS).
Describe the NIMS management characteristics that
are the foundation of the ICS.
Describe the ICS functional areas and the roles of
the Incident Commander and Command Staff.
Describe the General Staff roles within ICS.
Identify how NIMS management characteristics
apply to ICS for a variety of roles and discipline
areas.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-6

November 2018

Visual 4:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Student Introductions

Introduce yourself by providing:
•
•
•
•

Your name
Your job title
A brief statement of your overall experience with emergency or incident response
Your possible roles in responding to incidents

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-7

November 2018

Visual 5:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Student Expectations

What do you expect to gain from this course?

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-8

November 2018

Visual 6:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Course Structure

The course is divided into the following five units:
•
•
•
•
•

Unit 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview
Unit 2: NIMS Management Characteristics
Unit 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles
Unit 4: General Staff Roles
Unit 5: How ICS Applies to You

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-9

November 2018

Visual 7:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Course Logistics

Review the following information:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Course agenda
Sign-in sheet
Breaks
Message and telephone location
Cell phone policy
Facilities
Other concerns

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-10

November 2018

Visual 8:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Sample Agenda

Morning Session
•
•
•

Unit 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview (1 hours)
Unit 2: NIMS Management Characteristics (1.5 hours)
Unit 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles (1 hour)

Afternoon Session
•
•
•

Unit 4: General Staff Roles (1 hour)
Unit 5: How ICS Applies to You (1 hour)
Final Exam (1 hour)

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-11

November 2018

Visual 9:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Course Completion

In order to successfully complete this course, you must:
•
•
•

Participate in unit activities.
Achieve 75% or higher on the final exam.
Complete the end-of-course evaluation.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-12

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 10: Unit 1: ICS Overview
Unit 1 provides an overview of the Incident Command System (ICS). At the end of this
lesson, you should be able to:
•
•

Describe the Whole Community approach to ICS.
Identify the basic concept and benefits of ICS.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-13

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 11: Whole Community
Every part of society must be involved in
preparing for, protecting against,
responding to, recovering from, and
mitigating any and all incidents. The
Federal Government is only one part of the
whole community.
The Whole Community approach ensures
solutions that serve the entire community
are implemented, while simultaneously
making sure that the resources the different
members of the community bring to the
table are used efficiently. These members
include those in all levels of government as
well as those in non-governmental and
private-sector organizations in fields such
as transportation, health care, schools,
public works, communications, agriculture,
chemical/nuclear, and more.

As part of the whole community, you will need to understand your role
in the Incident Command System (ICS) and how ICS works to help
everyone involved. This course will help in that regard.
Note

This course addresses all disciplines that use ICS across the
community. In addition, Unit 4 handouts provide discipline-specific
examples of ICS applications, such as Public Works, Schools, and
Utilities. Unit 5 incorporates a variety of disciplines in a series of
scenarios.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-14

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 12: What is the Incident Command
System?
The Incident Command System
(ICS) is a standardized approach to
incident management that:
•

•
•
•
•

Is used for all kinds of incidents
by all types of organizations and
at all levels of government; ICS
is applicable to small incidents
as well as large and complex
ones.
Can be used not only for
emergencies, but also for
planned events.
Enables a coordinated response
among various jurisdictions and
agencies.
Establishes common processes
for incident-level planning and
resource management.
Allows for the integration of
resources (such as facilities,
equipment, personnel) within a
common organizational
structure.
ICS - Brief History

Note

ICS was developed in the 1970s following a series of catastrophic
fires in California. Property damage ran into the millions, and many
people died or were injured.
The personnel assigned to study the case histories and determine
the causes of these disasters discovered that response problems
could rarely be attributed to lack of resources or failure of tactics.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-15

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 13: When is ICS Used?
The Incident Command System (ICS) can be
used to manage any type of incident, including
a planned event (e.g., the Olympics, the
Governor's inauguration, state fairs, a local
parade, etc.). The use of ICS is applicable to all
types of incidents, regardless of their size or
cause.
As a system, ICS is extremely useful. Not only
does it provide an organizational structure for
incident management, but it also guides the
process for planning, building, and adapting that
structure.
Using ICS for every incident or planned
event provides the practice that will help to
maintain and improve skills needed to
effectively coordinate larger or more
complex efforts.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-16

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 14: ICS for Planned Events

From your own experiences, what are some examples of different types of planned
events where ICS was used?
Why was it beneficial to use ICS?

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-17

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 15: Incident Command System:
Promoting Response Partnerships

Incident Command System: Promoting Response Partnerships
The following video will introduce ICS and describe its importance.
Video

Video Duration: 1 minute, 30 seconds

Incident Command System: Promoting Response Partnerships
Video Transcript:
Disaster can strike anytime, anywhere. It takes many forms—a hurricane, an
earthquake, a tornado, a flood, a fire or a hazardous spill, or an act of terrorism. An
incident can build over days or weeks, or hit suddenly, without warning.
A poorly managed incident response can undermine our safety and wellbeing. With so
much at stake, we must effectively manage our response efforts.
Although most incidents are handled locally, partnerships among local, tribal, State, and
Federal agencies as well as nongovernmental and private-sector organizations may be
required.
As partners, we must respond together in a seamless, coordinated fashion.
The Incident Command System, or ICS, helps ensure integration of our response
efforts. ICS is a standardized, on-scene, all-hazards approach to incident management.
ICS allows all responders to adopt an integrated organizational structure that matches
the complexities and demands of the incident while respecting agency and jurisdictional
authorities. Although ICS promotes standardization, it is not without needed flexibility.
For example, the ICS organizational structure can expand or contract to meet incident
needs.
In this course, you’ll learn ICS principles. And more importantly, you’ll learn to interface
better with your response partners.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-18

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 16: ICS as a Component of the National
Incident Management System (NIMS)
The National Incident
Management System (NIMS) is a
systematic, proactive approach to
guide all levels of government,
nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), and the private sector to
work together to prevent, protect
against, mitigate, respond to, and
recover from the effects of
incidents. NIMS provides a
consistent foundation for all
incidents, ranging from daily
occurrences to incidents requiring
a coordinated Federal response.
NIMS is organized into three major
components:
•
•
•

Resource Management
Command and Coordination
- including the Incident
Command System
Communications and
Information Management

It is important to note that the
Incident Command System (ICS)
is just one part of NIMS.
National Preparedness and ICS Requirements
Review the following points about the value of using ICS:
Note

•
•

ICS works! It saves lives! Life safety is the top priority for ICS
response.
The use of ICS is a key indicator of National Incident Management
System (NIMS) implementation. Jurisdictions that receive some
Federal grants such as National Preparedness Grants must
demonstrate NIMS implementation. NIMS provides a systematic,
proactive approach guiding departments and agencies at all levels
of government, the private sector, and nongovernmental

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-19

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

organizations to work seamlessly to prevent, protect against,
respond to, recover from, and mitigate the effects of incidents,
regardless of cause, size, location, or complexity, in order to
reduce the loss of life and property, and harm to the environment.
In addition to the NIMS mandate, the following laws require the use of
ICS:
•

•

The Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA) of
1986 established Federal regulations for handling hazardous
materials. SARA directed the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) to establish rules for operations at
hazardous materials incidents.
OSHA rule 1910.120, effective March 6, 1990, requires all
organizations that handle hazardous materials to use ICS. The
regulation states: “The Incident Command System shall be
established by those employers for the incidents that will be under
their control and shall interface with other organizations or
agencies who may respond to such an incident.”

Note that the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) requires States
to use ICS at hazardous materials incidents.
According to the National Integration Center, “institutionalizing the use
of ICS” means that government officials, incident managers, and
emergency response organizations at all jurisdictional levels must
adopt ICS. Actions to institutionalize the use of ICS take place at two
levels:
•

Policy Level: At the policy level, institutionalizing ICS means
government officials (i.e., Governors, mayors, county and city
managers, tribal leaders, and others) must:
•
•

•

Adopt ICS through executive order, proclamation, or legislation
as the jurisdiction's official incident response system; and
Direct that incident managers and response organizations in
their jurisdictions train, exercise, and use ICS in their response
operations.

Organizational Level: At the organizational/operational level,
evidence that incident managers and emergency response
organizations are institutionalizing ICS would include the following:
•
•
•

ICS is being integrated into functional and system-wide
emergency operations policies, plans, and procedures.
ICS training is planned or underway for responders,
supervisors, and command-level officers.
Responders at all levels are participating in and/or coordinating
ICS-oriented exercises that involve responders from multiple
disciplines and jurisdictions.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-20

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

National Preparedness and ICS

Note

NIMS represents a core set of doctrine, concepts, principles,
terminology, and organizational processes that enables effective,
efficient, and collaborative incident management.
•

•

•

Resource Management: Resource Management describes
standard mechanisms to systematically manage resources,
including personnel, equipment, supplies, teams, and facilities,
both before and during incidents in order to allow organizations to
more effectively share resources when needed.
Command and Coordination: Command and Coordination
describes leadership roles, processes, and recommended
organizational structures for incident management at the
operational and incident support levels and explains how these
structures interact to manage incidents effectively and efficiently.
Communications and Information Management: Communications
and Information Management describes systems and methods that
help to ensure that incident personnel and other decision makers
have the means and information they need to make and
communicate decisions.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-21

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 17: Incident Response Problems

What are some common causes of incident response problems?

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-22

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 18: ICS Benefits - Student Activity
Activity Purpose: The purpose of this activity is to discuss the benefits of ICS.
Instructions: Follow the steps below to conduct this activity:
1. Divide into groups of five or six.
2. Work as a team to review the scenario presented below.
3. Identify the top three challenges for officials to manage this incident.
4. Write the challenges on chart paper.
5. Discuss how ICS could be used to address these challenges.
6. Select a spokesperson.
Time: 20 minutes (including debrief)
Scenario:
Continuing severe weather is causing widespread damage. There are multiple impacts
in the community. Vehicle movement is constrained, some people are stranded and are
in need of assistance, there have been impacts on communications and power, and
some structures are impacted. 9-1-1 operators are receiving conflicting reports about a
number of life-safety needs, including some weather-related injuries and an unverified
report of the structural collapse of an assisted living facility.
ICS BENEFITS - Student Activity
Activity Purpose: The purpose of this activity is to discuss the
benefits of ICS.
Instructions: Follow the steps below to conduct this activity:
1. Divide into groups of five or six.
2. Work as a team to review the scenario presented below.
3. Identify the top three challenges for officials to manage this
incident.
4. Write the challenges on chart paper.
5. Discuss how ICS could be used to address these challenges.
6. Select a spokesperson.
Activity

Time: 20 minutes (including debrief)
Scenario:
Continuing severe weather is causing widespread damage. There are
multiple impacts in the community. Vehicle movement is constrained,
some people are stranded and are in need of assistance, there have
been impacts on communications and power, and some structures
are impacted. 9-1-1 operators are receiving conflicting reports about a
number of life-safety needs, including some weather-related injuries
and an unverified report of the structural collapse of an assisted living
facility.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-23

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Discussion Questions:
What are the priorities for the incident?
What are the top three incident management challenges?
How will ICS help to address these challenges?

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-24

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 19: Benefits of ICS
The Incident Command System (ICS) has positively
impacted incident management efforts by:
•
•
•
•
•

Clarifying chain of command and supervision
responsibilities to improve accountability.
Leveraging interoperable communications systems
and plain language to improve communications.
Providing an orderly, systematic planning process.
Implementing a common, flexible, predesigned
management structure.
Fostering cooperation between diverse disciplines
and agencies.
ICS BENEFITS
The Incident Command System (ICS) has positively impacted incident
management efforts by:

Note

•
•
•
•

Clarifying chain of command and supervision responsibilities to
improve accountability.
Providing an orderly, systematic planning process
Implementing a common, flexible, predefined management
structure.
Fostering cooperation between diverse disciplines and agencies.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-25

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 20: ICS: Built on Best Practices
The Incident Command System (ICS) has been tested
for more than 40 years of emergency and
nonemergency applications by all levels of government;
and in nongovernmental and private-sector
organizations. ICS helps to ensure:
•
•
•

The safety of responders, community members, and
others.
The achievement of incident objectives.
The efficient use of resources.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-26

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 21: Review Questions

Let's review what you have learned in this Unit:
•
•
•

What is a basic definition of the Incident Command System?
Is it the same as NIMS?
What are some situations for which it can be used?

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-27

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 22: Unit 1 Summary
You have completed the Course Welcome and Incident Command System (ICS)
Overview unit. This unit presented the following key points:
•
•
•

ICS is a standardized management tool that allows better coordination and use of
resources.
ICS represents organizational “best practices” and has become the standard for
emergency management.
ICS can be used to manage the response for all incidents and planned events.

ICS works! It saves lives!

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-28

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

IS-100.c GLOSSARY
Glossary A-I

Glossary

Access and Functional Needs: Individual circumstances requiring
assistance, accommodation, or modification for mobility,
communication, transportation, safety, health maintenance, etc., due
to any temporary or permanent situation that limits an individual’s
ability to take action in an emergency.
Agency: A government element with a specific function offering a
particular kind of assistance.
Agency Administrator/Executive: The official responsible for
administering policy for an agency or jurisdiction.
Agency Representative: A person assigned by a primary, assisting,
or cooperating local, state, tribal, territorial, or Federal Government
agency, or nongovernmental or private organization, who has
authority to make decisions affecting that agency’s or organization’s
participation in incident management activities following appropriate
consultation with that agency’s leadership.
Area Command: An organization that oversees the management of
multiple incidents or oversees the management of a very large or
evolving situation with multiple ICS organizations. See Unified Area
Command.
Assigned Resource: A resource that has been checked in and
assigned work tasks on an incident.
Assignment: A task given to a person or team to perform based on
operational objectives defined in the IAP.
Assistant: A title for subordinates of principal Command Staff and
EOC director’s staff positions. The title indicates a level of technical
capability, qualification, and responsibility subordinate to the primary
positions. Assistants may also be assigned to unit leaders.
Assisting Agency: An agency or organization providing personnel,
services, or other resources to the agency with direct responsibility for
incident management.
Authority Having Jurisdiction: An entity that has the authority and
responsibility for developing, implementing, maintaining, and
overseeing the qualification process within its organization or
jurisdiction. This may be a state or Federal agency, training
commission, NGO, private sector company, or a tribal or local agency
such as a police, fire, or public works department. In some cases, the
AHJ may provide support to multiple disciplines that collaborate as a
part of a team (e.g., an IMT).

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-29

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Available Resource: A resource assigned to an incident, checked in,
and available for assignment.
Badging: The assignment of physical incident-specific credentials to
establish legitimacy and permit access to incident sites. See
Credentialing.
Base: See Incident Base.
Branch: The organizational level having functional or geographical
responsibility for major aspects of incident operations. A branch falls
between the Section Chief and the division or group in the Operations
Section, and between the section and units in the Logistics Section.
Branches are identified by Roman numerals or by functional area.
Camp: A geographical site within the general incident area (separate
from the Incident Base) that is equipped and staffed to provide
sleeping, food, water, and sanitary services to incident personnel.
Certification: The process of authoritatively attesting that individuals
meet qualifications established for key incident management functions
and are, therefore, qualified for specific positions.
Chain of Command: The orderly line of authority within the ranks of
incident management organizations.
Check-In: The process through which resources first report to an
incident. All responders, regardless of agency affiliation, report in to
receive an assignment in accordance with the rIncident Commande or
Unified Command’s established procedures.
Chief: The ICS title for individuals responsible for the management of
functional sections: Operations, Planning, Logistics, and
Finance/Administration.
Clear Text: Communication that does not use codes. See Plain
Language.
Command: The act of directing, ordering, or controlling by virtue of
explicit statutory, regulatory, or delegated authority.
Command Staff: A group of incident personnel that the Incident
Commander or Unified Command assigns to support the command
function at an ICP. Command staff often include a PIO, a Safety
Officer, and a Liaison Officer, who have assistants as necessary.
Additional positions may be needed, depending on the incident.
Cooperating Agency: An agency supplying assistance other than
direct operational or support functions or resources to the incident
management effort.
Coordinate: To exchange information systematically among
principals who have or may have a need to know certain information
to carry out specific incident management responsibilities.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-30

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Core Capability: An element defined in the National Preparedness
Goal as necessary to prevent, protect against, mitigate, respond to,
and recover from the threats and hazards that pose the greatest risk.
Credentialing: Providing documentation that identifies personnel and
authenticates and verifies their qualification for a particular position.
See Badging.
Critical Infrastructure: Assets, systems, and networks, whether
physical or virtual, so vital to the United States that the incapacitation
or destruction of such assets, systems, or networks would have a
debilitating impact on security, national economic security, national
public health or safety, or any combination of those matters.
Delegation of Authority: A statement that the agency executive
delegating authority and assigning responsibility provides to the
Incident Commander. The delegation of authority can include
priorities, expectations, constraints, and other considerations or
guidelines, as needed.
Demobilization: The orderly, safe, and efficient return of an incident
resource to its original location and status.
Departmental Operations Center: An operations or coordination
center dedicated to a single, specific department or agency. The focus
of a DOC is on internal agency incident management and response.
DOCs are often linked to and/or physically represented in a combined
agency EOC by an authorized agent(s) for the department or agency.
Deputy: A fully qualified individual who, in the absence of a superior,
can be delegated the authority to manage a functional operation or to
perform a specific task. In some cases, a deputy can act as relief for a
superior, and, therefore, should be fully qualified in the position.
Deputies generally can be assigned to the Incident Commander, EOC
director, General Staff, and branch directors.
Director: The ICS title for individuals responsible for supervision of a
branch. Also, an organizational title for an individual responsible for
managing and directing the team in an EOC.
Dispatch: The ordered movement of a resource or resources to an
assigned operational mission, or an administrative move from one
location to another.
Division: The organizational level having responsibility for operations
within a defined geographic area. Divisions are established when the
number of resources exceeds the manageable span of control of the
Section Chief. See Group.
Emergency: Any incident, whether natural, technological, or humancaused, that necessitates responsive action to protect life or property.
Emergency Management Assistance Compact: A congressionally
ratified agreement that provides form and structure to interstate
Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-31

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

mutual aid. Through EMAC, a disaster-affected state can request and
receive assistance from other member states quickly and efficiently,
resolving two key issues up front: liability and reimbursement.
Emergency Operations Center: The physical location where the
coordination of information and resources to support incident
management (on-scene operations) activities normally takes place.
An EOC may be a temporary facility or located in a more central or
permanently established facility, perhaps at a higher level of
organization within a jurisdiction.
Emergency Operations Plan: A plan for responding to a variety of
potential hazards.
Emergency Support Function: The grouping of governmental and
certain private sector capabilities into an organizational structure to
provide capabilities and services most likely needed to manage
domestic incidents.
Essential Elements of Information: Important and standard
information items, which support timely and informed decisions.
Evacuation: The organized, phased, and supervised withdrawal,
dispersal, or removal of people from dangerous or potentially
dangerous areas, and their reception and care in safe areas.
Event: See Planned Event.
Federal: Of or pertaining to the Federal Government of the United
States.
Finance/Administration Section: The ICS Section responsible for an
incident’s administrative and financial considerations.
General Staff: A group of incident personnel organized according to
function and reporting to the Incident Commander or Unified
Command. The ICS General Staff consists of the Operations Section
Chief, Planning Section Chief, Logistics Section Chief,
Finance/Administration Section Chief.
Group: An organizational subdivision established to divide the
incident management structure into functional areas of operation.
Groups are composed of resources assembled to perform a special
function not necessarily within a single geographic area. See Division.
Hazard: Something potentially dangerous or harmful, often the root
cause of an unwanted outcome.
Incident: An occurrence, natural or manmade, that necessitates a
response to protect life or property. In this document, the word
“incident” includes planned events as well as emergencies and/or
disasters of all kinds and sizes.
Incident Action Plan: An oral or written plan containing the
objectives established by the Incident Commander or Unified
Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-32

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Command and addressing tactics and support activities for the
planned operational period, generally 12 to 24 hours.
Incident Base: A location where personnel coordinate and administer
logistics functions for an incident. There is typically only one base per
incident. (An incident name or other designator is added to the term
Base.) The ICP may be co-located with the Incident Base.
Incident Command: The ICS organizational element responsible for
overall management of the incident and consisting of the Incident
Commander or Unified Command and any additional Command Staff
activated.
Incident Command Post: The field location where the primary
functions of incident command are performed. The ICP may be colocated with the Incident Base or other incident facilities.
Incident Command System: A standardized approach to the
command, control, and coordination of on-scene incident
management, providing a common hierarchy within which personnel
from multiple organizations can be effective. ICS is the combination of
procedures, personnel, facilities, equipment, and communications
operating within a common organizational structure, designed to aid in
the management of on-scene resources during incidents. It is used for
all kinds of incidents and is applicable to small, as well as large and
complex, incidents, including planned events.
Incident Commander: The individual responsible for on-scene
incident activities, including developing incident objectives and
ordering and releasing resources. The Incident Commander has
overall authority and responsibility for conducting incident operations.
Incident Complex: Two or more individual incidents located in the
same general area and assigned to a single Incident Commander or
Unified Command.
Incident Management: The broad spectrum of activities and
organizations providing operations, coordination, and support applied
at all levels of government, using both governmental and
nongovernmental resources to plan for, respond to, and recover from
an incident, regardless of cause, size, or complexity.
Incident Management Assistance Team: A team of ICS-qualified
personnel, configured according to ICS, that deploy in support of
affected jurisdictions and/or on-scene personnel.
Incident Management Team: A rostered group of ICS-qualified
personnel consisting of an Incident Commander, Command and
General Staff, and personnel assigned to other key ICS positions.
Incident Objective: A statement of an outcome to be accomplished
or achieved. Incident objectives are used to select strategies and
tactics. Incident objectives should be realistic, achievable, and
Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-33

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

measurable, yet flexible enough to allow strategic and tactical
alternatives.
Incident Personnel: All individuals who have roles in incident
management or support, whether on scene, in an EOC, or
participating in a MAC Group.
Information Management: The collection, organization, and control
over the structure, processing, and delivery of information from one or
more sources and distribution to one or more audiences who have a
stake in that information.
Intelligence/Investigations Function: Efforts to determine the
source or cause of the incident (e.g., disease outbreak, fire, complex
coordinated attack, or cyber incident) in order to control its impact
and/or help prevent the occurrence of similar incidents. In ICS, the
function may be accomplished in the Planning Section, Operations
Section, Command Staff, as a separate General Staff section, or in
some combination of these locations.
Interoperability: The ability of systems, personnel, and equipment to
provide and receive functionality, data, information, and/or services to
and from other systems, personnel, and equipment, between both
public and private agencies, departments, and other organizations, in
a manner enabling them to operate effectively together.

Glossary J-P

Glossary

Joint Field Office: The primary Federal incident management field
structure. The JFO is a temporary Federal facility that provides a
central location for the coordination of local, state, tribal, and Federal
governments and private sector and NGOs with primary responsibility
for response and recovery.
Joint Information Center: A facility in which personnel coordinate
incident-related public information activities. The JIC serves as the
central point of contact for all news media. Public information officials
from all participating agencies co-locate at, or virtually coordinate
through, the JIC.
Joint Information System: A structure that integrates overarching
incident information and public affairs into a cohesive organization
designed to provide consistent, coordinated, accurate, accessible,
timely, and complete information during crisis or incident operations.
Jurisdiction: Jurisdiction has two definitions depending on the
context:
•A range or sphere of authority. Public agencies have jurisdiction at
an incident related to their legal responsibilities and authority.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-34

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Jurisdictional authority at an incident can be political or geographical
(e.g., local, state, tribal, territorial, and Federal boundary lines) and/or
functional (e.g., law enforcement, public health).
•A political subdivision (e.g., municipality, county, parish, state,
Federal) with the responsibility for ensuring public safety, health, and
welfare within its legal authorities and geographic boundaries.
Kind: As applied to incident resources, a class or group of items or
people of the same nature or character or classified together because
they have traits in common.
Leader: The ICS title for an individual who is responsible for
supervision of a unit, strike team, resource team, or task force.
Liaison Officer: A member of the ICS Command Staff responsible for
coordinating with representatives from cooperating and assisting
agencies or organizations.
Local Government: Public entities responsible for the security and
welfare of a designated area as established by law. A county,
municipality, city, town, township, local public authority, school district,
special district, intrastate district, council of governments (regardless
of whether the council of governments is incorporated as a nonprofit
corporation under state law), regional or interstate government entity,
or agency or instrumentality of a local government; a tribe or
authorized tribal entity, or in Alaska, a Native Village or Alaska
Regional Native Corporation; a rural community, unincorporated town
or village, or other public entity.
Logistics: The process and procedure for providing resources and
other services to support incident management.
Logistics Section: The ICS Section responsible for providing
facilities, services, and material support for the incident.
Management by Objectives: A management approach, fundamental
to NIMS, that involves (1) establishing objectives, e.g., specific,
measurable and realistic outcomes to be achieved;(2) identifying
strategies, tactics, and tasks to achieve the objectives; (3) performing
the tactics and tasks and measuring and documenting results in
achieving the objectives; and (4) taking corrective action to modify
strategies, tactics, and/or performance to achieve the objectives.
Manager: The individual within an ICS organizational unit assigned
specific managerial responsibilities (e.g., Staging Area Manager or
Camp Manager).
Mission Area: One of five areas (Prevention, Protection, Mitigation,
Response, and Recovery) designated in the National Preparedness
Goal to group core capabilities.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-35

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Mitigation: The capabilities necessary to reduce the loss of life and
property from natural and/or manmade disasters by lessening the
impacts of disasters.
Mobilization: The processes and procedures for activating,
assembling, and transporting resources that have been requested to
respond to or support an incident.
Multiagency Coordination Group: A group, typically consisting of
agency administrators or executives from organizations, or their
designees, that provides policy guidance to incident personnel,
supports resource prioritization and allocation, and enables decision
making among elected and appointed officials and senior executives
in other organizations, as well as those directly responsible for
incident management.
Multiagency Coordination System: An overarching term for the
NIMS Command and Coordination systems: ICS, EOCs, MAC
Group/policy groups, and JISs.
Mutual Aid Agreement or Assistance Agreement: A written or oral
agreement between and among agencies/organizations and/or
jurisdictions that provides a mechanism to quickly obtain assistance in
the form of personnel, equipment, materials, and other associated
services. The primary objective is to facilitate the rapid, short-term
deployment of support prior to, during, and/or after an incident.
National: Of a nationwide character, including the local, state, tribal,
territorial, and Federal aspects of governance and policy.
National Incident Management System: A systematic, proactive
approach to guide all levels of government, NGOs, and the private
sector to work together to prevent, protect against, mitigate, respond
to, and recover from the effects of incidents. NIMS provides
stakeholders across the whole community with the shared vocabulary,
systems, and processes to successfully deliver the capabilities
described in the National Preparedness System. NIMS provides a
consistent foundation for dealing with all incidents, ranging from daily
occurrences to incidents requiring a coordinated Federal response.
National Planning Frameworks: Guidance documents for each of
the five preparedness mission areas that describe how the whole
community works together to achieve the National Preparedness
Goal. The Frameworks foster a shared understanding of roles and
responsibilities, from the firehouse to the White House, and clarifies
how the Nation coordinates, shares information, and works together—
ultimately resulting in a more secure and resilient Nation.
National Preparedness: The actions taken to plan, organize, equip,
train, and exercise to build and sustain the capabilities necessary to
prevent, protect against, mitigate the effects of, respond to, and

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-36

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

recover from those threats that pose the greatest risk to the security of
the Nation.
National Preparedness Goal: Doctrine describing what it means for
the whole community to be prepared for the types of incidents that
pose the greatest threat to the security of the Nation, including acts of
terrorism and emergencies and disasters, regardless of cause. The
goal itself is: “A secure and resilient Nation with the capabilities
required across the whole community to prevent, protect against,
mitigate, respond to, and recover from the threats and hazards that
pose the greatest risk.”
National Preparedness System: An organized process to achieve
the National Preparedness Goal of a secure and resilient Nation.
National Response Coordination Center: A multiagency
coordination center located at FEMA Headquarters. Its staff
coordinates the overall Federal support for major disasters and
emergencies, including catastrophic incidents and emergency
management program implementation.
Nongovernmental Organization: A group that is based on the
interests of its members, individuals, or institutions. An NGO is not
created by a government, but it may work cooperatively with
government. Examples of NGOs include faith-based groups, relief
agencies, organizations that support people with access and
functional needs, and animal welfare organizations.
Normal Operations/Steady State: The activation level that describes
routine monitoring of jurisdictional situation (no event or incident
anticipated).
Officer: The ICS title for a member of the Command Staff authorized
to make decisions and take action related to his/her area of
responsibility.
Operational Period: The time scheduled for executing a given set of
operation actions, as specified in the IAP. Operational periods can be
of various lengths, but are typically 12 to 24 hours.
Operational Security: The implementation of procedures and
activities to protect sensitive or classified operations involving sources
and methods of intelligence collection, investigative techniques,
tactical actions, counter surveillance measures, counterintelligence
methods, undercover officers, cooperating witnesses, and informants.
Operations Section: The ICS Section responsible for implementing
tactical incident operations described in the IAP. In ICS, the
Operations Section may include subordinate branches, divisions,
and/or groups.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-37

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Organization: Any association or group of persons with like
objectives. Examples include, but are not limited to, governmental
departments and agencies, NGOs, and private sector entities.
Plain Language: Communication that the intended audience can
understand and that meets the communicator’s purpose. For the
purpose of NIMS, plain language refers to a communication style that
avoids or limits the use of codes, abbreviations, and jargon, as
appropriate, during incidents involving more than a single agency.
Planned Event (Event): An incident that is a scheduled nonemergency activity (e.g., sporting event, concert, parade).
Planning Meeting: A meeting held, as needed, before and
throughout an incident to select specific strategies and tactics for
incident control operations and for service and support planning.
Planning Section: The ICS Section that collects, evaluates, and
disseminates operational information related to the incident and for
the preparation and documentation of the IAP. This section also
maintains information on the current and forecasted situation and on
the status of resources assigned to the incident.
Position Qualifications: The minimum criteria necessary for
individuals to fill a specific position.
Prevention: The capabilities necessary to avoid, prevent, or stop a
threatened or actual act of terrorism. In national preparedness
guidance, the term “prevention” refers to preventing imminent threats.
Private Sector: Organizations and individuals that are not part of any
governmental structure. The private sector includes for-profit and notfor-profit organizations, formal and informal structures, commerce,
and industry.
Protection: The capabilities necessary to secure the homeland
against acts of terrorism and manmade or natural disasters.
Protocol: A set of established guidelines for actions (designated by
individuals, teams, functions, or capabilities) under various specified
conditions.
Public Information: Processes, procedures, and systems for
communicating timely, accurate, and accessible information on an
incident’s cause, size, and current situation; resources committed;
and other matters of general interest to the public, responders, and
additional stakeholders (both directly affected and indirectly affected).
Public Information Officer: A member of the ICS Command Staff
responsible for interfacing with the public and media and/or with other
agencies with incident-related information needs.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-38

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Glossary Q-Z
Recovery: The capabilities necessary to assist communities affected
by an incident to recover effectively.
Glossary

Recovery Plan: A plan to restore an incident-affected area or
community.
Recovery Support Function: Organizing structures for key functional
areas of assistance outlined in the National Disaster Recovery
Framework that group capabilities of various government and private
sector partner organizations to promote effective recovery from
disasters before and after disasters strike.
Reimbursement: A mechanism to recoup funds expended for
incident-specific activities.
Resource Management: Systems for identifying available resources
at all jurisdictional levels to enable timely, efficient, and unimpeded
access to resources needed to prepare for, respond to, or recover
from an incident.
Resource Team: See Strike Team.
Resource Tracking: The process that all incident personnel and staff
from associated organizations use to maintain information regarding
the location and status of resources ordered for, deployed to, or
assigned to an incident.
Resources: Personnel, equipment, teams, supplies, and facilities
available or potentially available for assignment to incident operations
and for which status is maintained. Resources are described by kind
and type and may be used in operational support or supervisory
capacities at an incident or at an EOC.
Response: The capabilities necessary to save lives, protect property
and the environment, and meet basic human needs after an incident
has occurred.
Safety Officer: In ICS, a member of the Command Staff responsible
for monitoring incident operations and advising the Incident
Commander or Unified Command on all matters relating to
operational safety, including the health and safety of incident
personnel. The Safety Officer modifies or stops the work of personnel
to prevent unsafe acts.
Section: The ICS organizational element having responsibility for a
major functional area of incident management (e.g., Operations,
Planning, Logistics, and Finance/Administration).
Single Resource: An individual, a piece of equipment and its
personnel complement, or a crew/team of individuals with an identified
work supervisor that can be used on an incident.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-39

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Situation Report: Confirmed or verified information regarding the
specific details relating to an incident.
Span of Control: The number of subordinates for which a supervisor
is responsible, usually expressed as the ratio of supervisors to
individuals.
Staging Area: A temporary location for available resources in which
personnel, supplies, and equipment await operational assignment.
Standard Operating Procedure: A reference document or an
operations manual that provides the purpose, authorities, duration,
and details for the preferred method of performing a single function or
several interrelated functions in a uniform manner.
State: Used in this document to include any state of the United
States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,
the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of
the Northern Mariana Islands, and any possession of the United
States.
Status Report: Reports, such as spot reports, that include vital and/or
time-sensitive information. Status reports are typically functionspecific, less formal than situation reports, and are not always issued
on a specific schedule.
Strategy: The general course of action or direction to accomplish
incident objectives.
Strike Team: A set number of resources of the same kind and type
that have an established minimum number of personnel, common
communications, and a leader. In the law enforcement community,
strike teams are referred to as resource teams.
Supervisor: The ICS title for an individual responsible for a division or
group.
System: Any combination of processes, facilities, equipment,
personnel, procedures, and communications integrated for a specific
purpose.
Tactics: The deployment and directing of resources on an incident to
accomplish the objectives.
Task Force: Any combination of resources of different kinds and/or
types assembled to support a specific mission or operational need.
Terrorism: Any activity that involves an act that is dangerous to
human life or potentially destructive of critical infrastructure and is a
violation of the criminal laws of the United States or of any state or
other subdivision of the United States; and appears to be intended to
intimidate or coerce a civilian population, or to influence the policy of a
government by intimidation or coercion, or to affect the conduct of a
government by mass destruction, assassination, or kidnapping.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-40

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Threat: A natural or manmade occurrence, an individual, an entity, or
an action having or indicating the potential to harm life, information,
operations, the environment, and/or property.
Tools: Instruments and capabilities that allow the professional
performance of tasks, such as information systems, agreements,
doctrine, capabilities, and legislative authorities.
Type: A NIMS resource classification that refers to capability of a
specific kind of resource to which a metric is applied to designate it as
a specific numbered class.
Unified Area Command: A version of command established when
incidents under an Area Command are multijurisdictional. See Area
Command.
Unified Command: An ICS application used when more than one
agency has incident jurisdiction or when incidents cross political
jurisdictions.
Unit: The organizational element with functional responsibility for a
specific activity within the Planning, Logistics, and
Finance/Administration Sections in ICS.
Unit Leader: The individual in charge of a unit in ICS.
United States National Grid: A point and area location reference
system that FEMA and other incident management organizations use
as an accurate and expeditious alternative to latitude/longitude.
Unity of Command: A NIMS guiding principle stating that each
individual involved in incident management reports to and takes
direction from only one person.
Unity of Effort: A NIMS guiding principle that provides coordination
through cooperation and common interests and does not interfere with
Federal department and agency supervisory, command, or statutory
authorities.
Whole Community: A focus on enabling the participation in incident
management activities of a wide range of players from the private and
nonprofit sectors, including NGOs and the general public, in
conjunction with the participation of all levels of government, to foster
better coordination and working relationships.

Lesson 1: Course Welcome and ICS Overview

SM-41

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Lesson 2: NIMS Management
Characteristics

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-42

November 2018

Visual 1:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Unit 2 Overview

This unit presents the National Incident Management System
(NIMS) management characteristics. These characteristics are the foundation of all
NIMS command and coordination components, including the Incident Command
System (ICS).
Objective:
At the end of this unit, you should be able to:
•

Describe the 14 NIMS management characteristics.

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-43

November 2018

Visual 2:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Making ICS Work

Effective incident management relies
on a common organizational structure
for managing resources, making
decisions, and assigning tasks. The
Incident Command System (ICS) uses
a standardized management approach
to ensure that incidents are properly
managed and communications are
effectively coordinated during an
incident.
As an incident occurs, you may be
called upon to assist -- making you a
part of this organizational structure. To
ensure success, you should
understand how this structure works.

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-44

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 3:

NIMS Management Characteristics:

Overview

NIMS Management Characteristics
The following video will introduce the NIMS Management
Characteristics discussed in detail in this unit.
Video

Video Duration: 2 minutes, 30 seconds

NIMS Management Characteristics: Overview
Video Transcript
As you learned in the previous lesson, ICS is based on proven NIMS management
principles, which contribute to the strength and efficiency of the overall system.
ICS incorporates a wide range of management features and principles, beginning with
the use of common terminology.
[David Burns, Emergency Preparedness Manager, University of California Los Angeles]
Communication is probably one of the most essential elements of ICS. It’s important
that we know how to communicate.
[Daryl Lee Spiewak, Former Emergency Programs Manager, the Brazos River
Authority] If the terms that I use mean different things to different people, we’re going to
have a hard time communicating and doing what needs to be done to accomplish our
mission.
ICS emphasizes effective planning, including management by objectives and reliance
on an Incident Action Plan.
[Roberta Runge, EPA National NIMS Coordinator] You have to coordinate on what your
end objective is. All up and down the chain you have to have a common end goal. So
you can establish your objectives, you can ensure they’re in the Incident Action Plan,
and you can ensure that they are in agreement.
ICS employs a modular organizational structure that can be tailored based on the size,
complexity and hazards of an incident. Command of this organization is established
under a single Incident Commander or a Unified Command.
The ICS features related to command structure include chain of command and unity of
command.

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-45

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

[Bill Campbell, Former Director of Training, New York State Emergency Management
Office] One of the benefits is it gets all of the different organizations working under the
same framework.
ICS helps ensure full utilization of all incident resources by:
•
•
•
•
•

Maintaining a manageable span of control
Establishing designated incident facilities and locations
Implementing comprehensive resource management practices
Defining clear processes for dispatch/ deployment of resources
Ensuring integrated communications

ICS supports responders and decision makers through effective information and
intelligence management.
[Kristy Plourde, Emergency Management Specialist, U.S. Coast Guard] The common
operating picture is a critical thing that the Coast Guard has been working hard on
recently for ourselves because it’s something that helps us maintain a better operational
picture and it’s more consistent across the board, everyone up and down the chain of
command and across to other agencies understand the same picture.
ICS counts on each of us taking personal accountability for our own actions. And
finally, the mobilization process helps ensure that incident objectives can be achieved
while responders remain safe.
[Kristy Plourde, Emergency Management Specialist, U.S. Coast Guard] To have NIMS
work effectively, it’s got to be top-down support.
The NIMS Management Characteristics covered in this lesson form the basis for
effective, team-based incident response under the Incident Command System (ICS).

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-46

November 2018

Visual 4:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

NIMS Management Characteristics:

Overview
The Incident Command System (ICS) is based on the following 14 proven NIMS
management characteristics, each of which contributes to the strength and efficiency of
the overall system:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Common Terminology
Modular Organization
Management by Objectives
Incident Action Planning
Manageable Span of Control
Incident Facilities and Locations
Comprehensive Resource
Management

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Integrated Communications
Establishment and Transfer of
Command
Unified Command
Chain of Command and Unity of
Command
Accountability
Dispatch/Deployment
Information and Intelligence
Management

SM-47

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 5:

Common Terminology

The Incident Command System (ICS) establishes Common
Terminology that allows diverse incident management and
support organizations to work together across a wide variety
of emergency functions and hazard scenarios. This common
terminology covers the following:
•
•

•

Organizational Functions: Major functions and functional

units with incident management responsibilities are named
and defined. They remain standard and consistent.
Resource Descriptions: Major resources – including
personnel, equipment, teams, and facilities – are given
common names and are “typed” with respect to their
capabilities.
Incident Facilities: Common terminology is used to
designate the facilities in the vicinity of the incident area.

During an incident:
•
•

Communications should use common terms.
Organizations should avoid radio codes, agency-specific
codes, acronyms, or jargon. Usage of these types of codes
may cause confusion or possibly compromise life safety
due to a misunderstanding or misinterpretation.

The goal is to promote understanding among all parties
involved in managing an incident.

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-48

November 2018

Visual 6:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Common Terminology Discussion

Even if you use codes on a daily basis, why should you use common terminology
during an incident response?

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-49

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 7:

Modular Organization

The Incident Command System (ICS)
organizational structure develops in a
modular fashion based on the
incident’s size and complexity.
•

•

The responsibility for the
establishment and expansion of the
ICS modular organization rests with
the Incident Commander.
As the incident grows more
complex, the ICS organization may
expand as functional responsibilities
are delegated.

ICS Organizational Structure

Note

The ICS organizational structure develops in a top-down, modular
fashion that is based on the size and complexity of the incident, as
well as the specifics of the hazard environment created by the
incident. As incident complexity increases, the organization expands
from the top down as functional responsibilities are delegated.
The ICS organizational structure is flexible. When needed, separate
functional elements can be established and subdivided to enhance
internal organizational management and external coordination. As the
ICS organizational structure expands, the number of management
positions also expands to adequately address the requirements of the
incident.

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-50

November 2018

Visual 8:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Management by Objectives

The Incident Commander or Unified
Command (which will be discussed
later), establishes incident objectives
that drive incident operations.
Management by Objectives includes
the following:
•
•
•

•

Establishing specific, measurable
incident objectives.
Identifying strategies, tactics, tasks
and activities to achieve the
objectives.
Developing and issuing
assignments, plans, procedures,
and protocols to accomplish
identified tasks.
Documenting results for the incident
objectives.

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-51

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 9:

Incident Action Planning

Incident action planning guides effective incident
management activities. An Incident Action Plan (IAP)
is a concise, coherent means of capturing and
communicating overall incident priorities, objectives,
strategies, tactics, and assignments in the context of
both operational and support activities. The IAP should
focus on addressing the needs of future timeframes
(called operational periods).
To be effective, an IAP should:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Cover a specified timeframe
Be proactive
Specify the incident objectives
State the activities to be completed
Assign responsibilities
Identify needed resources
Specify communication protocols

For smaller/less complex incidents, the IAP may be
oral or written, except for hazardous materials
incidents, which require a written IAP. FEMA has
developed a series of ICS Forms for use in developing
a written IAP.

Incident Action Plan
Every response has a strategy—like a lesson plan—called an Incident
Action Plan (IAP).
Note

To be effective, an IAP should:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Cover a specified timeframe
Be proactive
Specify the incident objectives
State the activities to be completed
Assign responsibilities
Identify needed resources
Specify communication protocols

Even the smallest of incidents are managed by incident objectives
and plans. The plan can be as simple as the next steps the Incident

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-52

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Commander plans to do. The steps can be orally communicated to
the rest of the ICS organization.
Incident Action Plan Questions
Every IAP must answer the following four questions:
Note

•
•
•
•

What do we want to do?
Who is responsible for doing it?
How do we communicate with each other?
What is the procedure if someone is injured?

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-53

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 10: Incident Action Plan - Activity 2.1
Activity Purpose: To illustrate how to develop an IAP.
Instructions: Working in groups:
1. Identify four items you would include in an Incident Action Plan for the severe
weather scenario described below.
2. Record these four IAP items on chart paper.
3. Select a spokesperson to report back to the group. Be prepared to share your
answers in 5 minutes.
Time: 10 minutes
Scenario: Continuing severe weather is causing widespread damage. There are
multiple impacts in the community. Vehicle movement is constrained, some people are
stranded and are in need of assistance, there have been impacts on communications
and power, and some structures are impacted. 9-1-1 operators are receiving conflicting
reports about a number of life-safety needs, including some weather-related injuries and
an unverified report of the structural collapse of an assisted living facility.

Incident Action Plan - Activity 2.1 - SM
Activity Purpose: To illustrate how to develop an IAP.
Instructions: Working in groups:
1. Identify four items you would include in an Incident Action Plan for
the severe weather scenario described below.
2. Record these four IAP items on chart paper.
3. Select a spokesperson to report back to the group. Be prepared to
share your answers in 5 minutes.
Time: 10 minutes
Activity

Scenario: Continuing severe weather is causing widespread damage.
There are multiple impacts in the community. Vehicle movement is
constrained, some people are stranded and are in need of assistance,
there have been impacts on communications and power, and some
structures are impacted. 9-1-1 operators are receiving conflicting
reports about a number of life-safety needs, including some weatherrelated injuries and an unverified report of the structural collapse of an
assisted living facility.

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-54

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 11: Manageable Span of Control
Depending on your role within the Incident
Command System (ICS) structure, you
may be asked to manage the activities of
others.
Span of control refers to the number of
individuals or resources that one
supervisor can manage effectively during
an incident.
The optimal span of control is one
supervisor to five subordinates (1:5).
However, effective incident management
may require ratios significantly different
from this. This ratio is a guideline--incident
personnel should use their best
judgement to determine the appropriate
ratio for an incident.

Note

If too much responsibility is given to the supervisor, the span of
control may become unmanageable. A manageable span of control
on incidents may actually vary depending upon the type of incident,
nature of the task, hazards and safety factors, and distances between
personnel and resources.
Maintaining a manageable span of control is particularly important at
incidents where safety and accountability are a top priority.

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-55

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 12: Manageable Span of Control
Discussion

What are some examples of when span of control is most critical?

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-56

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 13: Incident Facilities and Locations
Depending upon the incident size and
complexity, various types of support
facilities may be established by
Incident Command. These
designated facilities typically include:
•
•
•
•
•

Incident Command Post (ICP)
Incident base, staging areas, and
camps
Mass casualty triage areas
Point-of-distribution
Emergency shelters

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-57

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 14: Comprehensive Resource
Management
Comprehensive Resource
Management describes standard
mechanisms to identify
requirements, order and acquire,
mobilize, track and report,
demobilize, and reimburse and
restock resources such as
personnel, teams, facilities,
equipment and supplies.

Key resource management activities include:

Note

•
•
•
•

Resource Identification and Typing
Qualification, Certification and Credentialing Personnel
Planning for Resources
Acquiring, Storing and Inventorying Resources

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-58

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 15: Comprehensive Resource
Management Discussion

Why is Comprehensive Resource Management important during an incident?

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-59

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 16: Integrated Communications
Incident communications are facilitated through the development and use of a
common communications plan and interoperable communication processes and
systems that include voice and data links.
Integrated Communications are necessary to:
•
•
•

Maintain connectivity
Achieve situational awareness
Facilitate information sharing

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-60

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 17: Integrated
Communications Discussion

What are some examples of what Integrated Communications may look like?

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-61

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 18: Establishment and Transfer of
Command
The command function should be clearly established
at the beginning of an incident. The jurisdiction or
organization with primary responsibility for the
incident designates the Incident Commander and the
process for transferring command.
Transfer of command may occur during the course of
an incident. When command is transferred, the
process should include a briefing that captures all
essential information for continuing safe and
effective operations.

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-62

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 19: Establishment and Transfer of
Command Discussion

What are some reasons that Command might be transferred?

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-63

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 20: Unified Command
In a Unified Command there is no
single "Commander." Instead the
Unified Command manages the
incident through jointly approved
objectives. Unified Command allows
agencies with different legal,
geographic, and functional
responsibilities to work together
effectively without affecting individual
agency authority, responsibility, or
accountability.
Unified Command is typically
established when no single
jurisdiction, agency or organization
has the authority and/or resources to
manage the incident on its own.

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-64

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 21: Chain of Command
Chain of command is an orderly line that details how
authority flows through the hierarchy of the incident
management organization. Chain of command:
•
•

Allows an Incident Commander to direct and
control the actions of all personnel on the incident.
Avoids confusion by requiring that orders flow from
supervisors.

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-65

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 22: Unity of Command
While chain of command relates to the overall
hierarchy of the organization, unity of command deals
with the fact that all individuals have a single
designated supervisor they report to.
Based on the principle of unity of command, you will:
•
•

Report to only one Incident Command System
(ICS) supervisor.
Receive work assignments only from your ICS
supervisor.

When you are assigned to an incident, you no longer
report directly to your day-to-day supervisor.

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-66

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 23: Accountability
Effective accountability during incident operations is
essential. As part of the Incident Command System
(ICS) structure, you will need to abide by agency
policies and guidelines and any applicable local, tribal,
state, or Federal rules and regulations.
There are several principles you will need to adhere to:
•
•
•
•
•

•

Check-In/Check-Out. All responders must report in
to receive an assignment. Checking out is just as
critical as checking in.
Incident Action Planning. Response operations
must be coordinated as outlined in the Incident
Action Plan.
Unity of Command. Each individual will be assigned
to only one supervisor.
Personal Responsibility. ICS relies on each
individual taking personal accountability for his or
her own actions.
Span of Control. Supervisors must be able to
adequately supervise and control their subordinates,
as well as communicate with and manage all
resources under their supervision.
Resource Tracking. Supervisors must record and
report resource status changes as they occur.
Accountability starts as soon as a resource is
requested through the time that the resource returns
to their home base safely.

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-67

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 24: Dispatch/Deployment
Resources should be deployed only when requested or
when dispatched by an appropriate authority through
established resource management systems.
Resources not requested should refrain from selfdispatching to avoid overburdening the incident
command.

Dispatch/Deployment
Another key feature of ICS is the importance of managing resources
to adjust to changing conditions.
Note

When an incident occurs, you must be dispatched or deployed to
become part of the incident response. In other words, until you are
deployed to the incident organization, you remain in your everyday
role.
After being deployed, your first task is to check in and receive an
assignment.
After check-in, you will locate your incident supervisor and obtain your
initial briefing. The briefings you receive and give should include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Current assessment of the situation.
Identification of your specific job responsibilities.
Identification of coworkers.
Location of work area.
Identification of break areas, as appropriate.
Procedural instructions for obtaining needed resources.
Operational periods/work shifts.
Required safety procedures and personal protective equipment
(PPE), as appropriate.

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-68

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 25: Dispatch/Deployment - Activity 2.2
Dispatch/Deployment - Activity 2.2
Instructions: Working individually:
•
•

Review the scenario and discussion question presented in the
Student Manual.
Be prepared to share your answer in 5 minutes.

Time: 10 minutes
Activity

Scenario: Rosa is an off-duty certified Emergency Medical Technician
who lives near the scene of a major structural collapse that has
occurred in a busy shopping center. The media are reporting that
there are injured people wandering around the parking area who need
immediate medical attention.
What should Rosa do?

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-69

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 26: Dispatch/Deployment Discussion

Why shouldn't personnel arrive at an incident without being requested or
dispatched?

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-70

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 27: Information and Intelligence
Management

Information and intelligence are important in the
Incident Command System (ICS).
Incident management must establish a process for
gathering, analyzing, assessing, sharing, and managing
incident-related information and intelligence. In NIMS,
"intelligence" refers exclusively to threat-related
information developed by law enforcement, medical
surveillance, and other investigative organizations.

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-71

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 28: Information and Intelligence
Management Discussion

What are some examples of sources where you can find and gather information and
intelligence?

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-72

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 29: Unit 2 Summary
You have completed the National Incident Management System (NIMS) Management
Characteristics unit.
This unit introduced:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Common Terminology
Modular Organization
Management by Objectives
Incident Action Planning
Manageable Span of Control
Incident Facilities and Locations
Comprehensive Resource
Management

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Integrated Communications
Establishment and Transfer of
Command
Unified Command
Chain of Command and Unity of
Command
Accountability
Dispatch/Deployment
Information and Intelligence
Management

SM-73

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 30: Unit 2 Summary Continued
The next unit will provide an overview of the ICS Functional Areas and introduce the
roles of the Incident Commander and Command Staff.

Lesson 2: NIMS Management Characteristics

SM-74

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and
Command Staff Roles

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-75

November 2018

Visual 1:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Unit 3 Overview

This unit introduces you to the Incident Command System (ICS) Functional Areas and
roles of the Incident Commander and Command Staff. By the end of this unit, you
should be able to:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Identify the five major ICS functional areas.
Describe the role of the Incident Commander.
Describe the selection of and transfer of command between Incident Commanders.
Identify the position titles associated with the Command Staff.
Describe the roles of the Command Staff.
Differentiate between incident command and incident coordination.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-76

November 2018

Visual 2:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

ICS Functional Areas and Command

Staff Roles
Every incident requires that certain functional
areas be implemented. The problem must be
identified and assessed, a plan to deal with it
must be developed and implemented, and the
necessary resources must be procured and
paid for.
Regardless of the size of the incident, these
functional areas are all required.
In case you ever need to assist with an incident,
you should understand how the management
structure is constructed using the Incident
Command System (ICS). This will help you
understand your role in the structure and how
you may receive information and assignments.
This unit focuses on the five major functional
areas and the Command Staff roles. The
General Staff roles will be discussed in the next
unit.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-77

November 2018

Visual 3:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Five Major ICS Functional Areas

There are five major Incident Command System
(ICS) functional areas that are the foundation on
which an incident management organization
develops.
These functions apply to incidents of all sizes and
types, including both planned events and ones that
occur without warning.
If you are in an incident and hear these terms, it’s
important for you to know what they mean. For
instance, you may be directed to provide
documents to the Planning Section or receipts to
the Finance/Administration Section.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-78

November 2018

Visual 4:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

ICS Functional Area Descriptions

Incident Command: Sets the incident objectives,
strategies, and priorities, and has overall
responsibility for the incident.
Operations: Conducts operations to reach the
incident objectives. Establishes tactics and directs
all operational resources.
Planning: Supports the incident action planning
process by tracking resources, collecting/analyzing
information, and maintaining documentation.
Logistics: Arranges for resources and needed
services to support achievement of the incident
objectives (resources can include personnel,
equipment, teams, supplies, and facilities).
Finance/Administration: Monitors costs related to
the incident. Provides accounting, procurement,
time recording, and cost analyses.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-79

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 5:

Intelligence/Investigations Function

in ICS

Note

Intelligence/Investigations (I/I) is a sixth ICS function identified in
NIMS. The Intelligence / Investigations function can be established to
collect, analyze, and disseminate incident-related information and
intelligence for incidents involving intensive intelligence gathering and
investigative activity (such as a criminal or terrorist act, or
epidemiological, accident or mass fatality investigation).

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-80

November 2018

Visual 6:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Review of Functional Areas (1 of 5)

Which ICS Functional Area supports the incident action planning process by
tracking resources, collecting/analyzing information, and maintaining
documentation?

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-81

November 2018

Visual 7:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Review of Functional Areas (2 of 5)

Which ICS Functional Area sets the incident objectives, strategies, and priorities,
and has overall responsibility for the incident?

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-82

November 2018

Visual 8:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Review of Functional Areas (3 of 5)

Which ICS Functional Area conducts operations to reach the incident objectives,
establishes tactics, and directs all operational resources?

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-83

November 2018

Visual 9:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Review of Functional Areas (4 of 5)

Which ICS Functional Area monitors costs related to the incident and provides
accounting, procurement, time recording, and cost analyses?

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-84

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 10: Review of Functional Areas (5 of 5)

Which ICS Functional Area arranges for resources and needed services to support
achievement of the incident objectives?

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-85

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 11: ICS Structure

Note

The standard Incident Command System (ICS) organizational
structure is shown here. Incident Command, which could be a single
Incident Commander or a Unified Command, will lead the effort and,
as needed, assign Command Staff and General Staff. For the
remainder of this unit, we will discuss the Incident Command function
and the members of the Command Staff.
ICS Organization is Unique
The ICS organization is unique but easy to understand. There is no
correlation between the ICS organization and the administrative
structure of any single agency or jurisdiction.
For example, someone who serves as a director every day would not
normally use that title when deployed under an ICS structure. They
would use the ICS title of the position that they were assigned to
within the ICS structure.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-86

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

This is deliberate, because confusion over different position titles and
organizational structures has been a significant stumbling block to
effective incident management in the past.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-87

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 12: Incident Command Definition
The National Incident Management System
(NIMS) defines command as the act of
directing, ordering, or controlling by virtue of
explicit statutory, regulatory, or delegated
authority.
When you are using the Incident Command
System (ICS) to manage an incident, an
Incident Commander is assigned. The Incident
Commander has the authority to establish
objectives, make assignments, and order
resources. To achieve these ends, the Incident
Commander works closely with staff and
technical experts to analyze the situation and
consider alternative strategies.
The Incident Commander should have the
training, experience, and expertise to serve in
this capacity. Qualifications to serve as an
Incident Commander should not be based
solely on rank, grade, or technical knowledge.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-88

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 13: Incident Commander
Let’s begin by taking a closer look at the Incident Commander. The Incident
Commander is responsible for the overall management of the incident. Overall
management includes Command Staff assignments required to support the incident
command function. The Incident Commander is the only position that is always
staffed in ICS applications. On small incidents and events, one person-the
Incident Commander-may accomplish all management functions.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-89

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 14: Incident Commander Discussion

Why is it critical to establish command from the beginning of an incident?

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-90

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 15: Incident Commander Responsibilities
In addition to having the overall responsibility
for managing the entire incident, the Incident
Commander is specifically responsible for:
•
•

•

Ensuring overall incident safety
Providing information services to internal
and external stakeholders, such as disaster
survivors, agency executives, and senior
officials
Establishing and maintaining liaisons with
other agencies participating in the incident

The Incident Commander may appoint one or
more Deputies. If a Deputy is assigned, he or
she should be fully qualified to assume the
Incident Commander’s position.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-91

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 16: Selecting or Changing Incident
Commanders
The command function should be clearly
established at the beginning of an incident. The
jurisdiction or organization with primary
responsibility for an incident designates the
individual at the scene who is responsible for
establishing command and the protocol for
transferring command. As an incident becomes
more or less complex, command may change to
meet the needs of the incident.
When command is transferred, the process
should include a briefing that captures all
essential information for continuing safe and
effective operations.

Reasons for Transfer of Command
There are several possible reasons that command might be
transferred. Transfer of command may take place when:
Note

•
•
•

•

A more qualified Incident Commander arrives and assumes
command.
A jurisdiction or agency is legally required to take command. For
example, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) is legally
required to take the lead for investigations of terrorist incidents.
The incident changes in complexity. For example, an incident
might start in a small area, but spread into the surrounding
community, affecting multiple jurisdictions, institutions, or
agencies.
The current Incident Commander needs to rest. On long or
extended incidents, there is normally turnover of personnel to
accommodate work/rest requirements.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-92

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 17: Transfer of Command Discussion
The transfer of command process always includes a thorough transfer of command
briefing, which may be oral, written, or a combination of both.
It is also important to remember that the rest of the incident staff should be notified of
the transfer of command.

What would you include in a transfer of command briefing?

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-93

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Transfer of Command Process
Transfer of Command Process

Note

The process of moving the responsibility for incident command from
one Incident Commander to another is called “transfer of command.”
It should be recognized that transition of command on an expanding
incident is to be expected. It does not reflect on the competency of the
current Incident Commander.
There are five important actions in effectively assuming command of
an incident in progress.
1. The incoming Incident Commander should, if at all possible,
personally perform an assessment of the incident situation with the
existing Incident Commander.
2. The incoming Incident Commander must be adequately briefed.
This briefing must be by the current Incident Commander, and
take place face-to-face if possible. The briefing must cover the
following:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Incident history (what has happened)
Priorities and objectives
Current plan
Resource assignments
Incident organization
Resources ordered/needed
Facilities established
Status of communications
Any constraints or limitations
Incident potential
Delegation of authority

3. After the incident briefing, the incoming Incident Commander
should determine an appropriate time for transfer of command.
4. At the appropriate time, notice of a change in incident command
should be made to:
•
•
•
•

Agency headquarters.
General Staff members (if designated).
Command Staff members (if designated).
All incident personnel.

5. The incoming Incident Commander may give the previous Incident
Commander another assignment on the incident. There are
several advantages to this strategy:
•

The initial Incident Commander retains first-hand knowledge at
the incident site.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-94

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

•

This strategy allows the initial Incident Commander to observe
the progress of the incident and to gain experience.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-95

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 18: Deputy Incident Commander
Discussion

Scenario: The Deputy Incident Commander will be replacing the current
Incident Commander, who needs to attend to a family emergency.
What is the correct action for the Incident Commander?

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-96

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 19: Delegating Incident Management
Responsibilities

The Incident Commander only creates those sections that are needed. If a
section is not staffed, the Incident Commander will manage those functions.

Note

The Incident Commander is responsible for all Incident Command
System (ICS) functional areas until he or she delegates a function.
Since the ICS organization is modular, it has the ability to expand or
contract to meet the needs of the incident.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-97

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 20: ICS Command Staff
Depending upon the size and type of incident
or event, the Incident Commander may
designate personnel to provide information,
safety, and liaison services. In the Incident
Command System (ICS), the Command Staff
may include:
•

•

•

Public Information Officer, who
interfaces with the public and media and/or
with other agencies with incident-related
information requirements.
Safety Officer, who monitors incident
operations and advises the Incident
Commander on all matters relating to
safety, including the health and safety of
incident management personnel.
Liaison Officer, who serves as the
Incident Commander’s point of contact for
representatives of governmental agencies,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
and private-sector organizations.

Incident Commanders may also choose to
appoint technical specialists (such as legal,
medical, science and technology, or access
and functional needs) to act as command
advisors.
The Command Staff reports directly to the
Incident Commander. In a complex incident,
Assistant Officers may be assigned to each of
the Command Staff functions.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-98

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 21: Command Staff Overview - Video

Command Staff Overview Video
The following video will provide an overview of the Command Staff
Officers.
Video

Video Duration: 1 minute, 45 seconds

Command Staff Overview
Video Transcript
You’ve now learned that the Incident Commander has overall authority and
responsibility for conducting incident operations. An Incident Commander may assign
staff to assist with managing the incident.
The Command Staff consists of the Public Information Officer, Safety Officer, and
Liaison Officer, who all report directly to the Incident Commander.
Let’s look at the roles of each member of the Command Staff. The Public Information
Officer serves as the conduit for information to internal and external stakeholders,
including the media and the public.
Accurate information is essential. The Public Information Officer serves as the primary
contact for anyone who wants information about the incident and the response to it.
Another member of the Command Staff is the Safety Officer, who monitors conditions
and develops measures for assuring the safety of all personnel.
The Safety Officer is responsible for advising the Incident Commander on issues
regarding incident safety, conducting risk analyses, and implementing safety measures.
The final member of the Command Staff is the Liaison Officer, who serves as the
primary contact for supporting agencies assisting at an incident.
Additionally, the Liaison Officer responds to requests from incident personnel for
contacts among the assisting and cooperating agencies, and monitors incident
operations in order to identify any current or potential problems between response
agencies.
A Command Staff may not be necessary at every incident, but every incident requires
that certain management functions be performed. An effective Command Staff frees the
Incident Commander to assume a leadership role.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-99

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 22: Command Staff Knowledge Check (1
of 3)

Which member of the Command Staff is described below?
"I work very closely with Operations to make sure that our people in the field are
wearing appropriate protective equipment and implementing safe tactical options."

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-100

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 23: Command Staff Knowledge Check (2
of 3)

Which member of the Command Staff is described below?
"I provide briefings to supporting Agency Representatives and work with them to
address their questions and concerns about the operation. I remain visible on the
incident scene to all incoming cooperating and assisting agencies."

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-101

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 24: Command Staff Knowledge Check (3
of 3)

Which member of the Command Staff is described below?
"I am the primary contact for anyone who wants details about the incident and our
response to it. I serve an external audience through the media and an internal
audience including incident staff and agency personnel."

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-102

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 25: Command Staff Roles - Activity 3.1
Activity Purpose: To illustrate how ICS can be used to address incident management
issues.
Instructions: Working as a team:
1. Review the scenario presented on the next page of your Student Manual.
2. Identify which Command Staff positions would be assigned.
3. Next, if you were the Incident Commander, what specific activities would you
delegate to each Command Staff member?
4. Select a spokesperson. Be prepared to present in 10 minutes.
Time: 15 minutes
Scenario:
An unexpected flash flood has struck a small community. As a result:
•
•
•
•
•

Homes, schools, the business district, and the community college are being
evacuated.
Damage to critical infrastructure includes contamination of the water supply, downed
power lines, and damaged roads.
Perimeter control and security in the business district are needed.
Mutual aid is arriving from several surrounding communities.
Media representatives are arriving at the scene.
Command Staff Roles - Activity 3.1
Activity Purpose: To illustrate how ICS can be used to address
incident management issues.
Instructions: Working as a team:
1. Review the scenario presented on the next page of your Student
Manual.
2. Identify which Command Staff positions would be assigned.
3. Next, if you were the Incident Commander, what specific activities
would you delegate to each Command Staff member?
4. Select a spokesperson. Be prepared to present in 10 minutes.
Activity

Time: 15 minutes
Scenario:
An unexpected flash flood has struck a small community. As a result:
•
•
•
•

Homes, schools, the business district, and the community college
are being evacuated.
Damage to critical infrastructure includes contamination of the
water supply, downed power lines, and damaged roads.
Perimeter control and security in the business district are needed.
Mutual aid is arriving from several surrounding communities.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-103

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

•

Media representatives are arriving at the scene.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-104

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 26: Incident Coordination
Now that we've discussed the Command Staff roles,
let's take a look at how the overall incident is
coordinated.
Coordination involves the activities that ensure the
onsite Incident Command System (ICS) organization
receives the information, resources, and support needed
to achieve those incident objectives. Coordination takes
place in a number of entities and at all levels of
government. Examples of coordination activities include:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Establishing policy based on interactions with
agency executives, other agencies, and
stakeholders.
Collecting, analyzing, and disseminating information
to support the establishment of shared situational
awareness.
Establishing priorities among incidents.
Resolving critical resource issues.
Facilitating logistics support and resource tracking.
Synchronizing public information messages to
ensure that everyone is speaking with one voice.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-105

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 27: Command and Coordination
Effective incident management
consists of four overarching areas of
responsibility:
1. Direct tactical response to save
lives, stabilize the incident, and
protect property and the
environment
2. Incident support through resource
acquisition, information gathering,
and interagency coordination
3. Policy guidance and senior level
decision making
4. Outreach and communication with
the media and public to keep them
informed about the incident
These objectives are accomplished
through the use of the Incident
Command System (ICS), Emergency
Operations Centers (EOCs), Multiagency Coordination (MAC) Groups,
and the Joint Information System
(JIS), respectively.

Note

The Command and Coordination component of NIMS defines these
structures and explains how various elements operating at different
levels of incident management interface to achieve the maximum
effect through a shared understanding.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-106

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 28: Emergency Operations Center Role
Jurisdictions and organizations across the Nation use
Emergency Operations Centers (EOCs) as an element
of their emergency management programs.
Typically, an Emergency Operations Center (EOC)
supports the on-scene response by relieving the
Incident Commander of the burden of external
coordination and the responsibility for securing
additional resources.
An EOC is:
•
•
•
•
•

A physical or virtual location where staff from
multiple agencies come together to address
imminent threats and hazards
Staffed with personnel trained for, and authorized to,
represent their agency/discipline
Equipped with mechanisms for communicating with
the incident site
Providing support to the incident by obtaining
resources
Applicable at different levels of government

EOCs may be established at the Federal, state, territorial, tribal, and
local levels.
Note

If you are from a non-governmental organization (NGO) or from the
private sector, you may be asked to assist at the EOC to assess a
situation, provide advice, and make recommendations based on your
knowledge and professional expertise.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-107

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 29: Joint Information Center
Another coordination entity is the Joint Information
Center (JIC). The JIC:
•
•

May be established to coordinate all incident-related
public information activities
Serves as the central point of contact for all news
media-when possible, public information officials
from all participating agencies should co-locate at
the JIC

JICs may be established at various levels of government
and at incident sites. Depending on your role in the
incident, you may need to direct individuals or
organizations to the JIC to obtain information.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-108

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 30: Incident Command or Incident
Coordination

Do these statements represent Incident Command or Incident Coordination?
1. Establish objectives, make assignments, and order resources.
2. Collect, analyze, and disseminate information.
3. Synchronize public information messages.
4. Establish priorities among incidents.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-109

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 31: Unit 3 Summary
This unit introduced you to the:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Five major Incident Command System (ICS) Functional Areas.
ICS organizational structure.
Incident Commander roles and responsibilities.
Selection and transfer of Incident Commanders.
Command Staff roles and responsibilities.
Differences between incident command and incident coordination.

The next unit provides an introduction to the ICS General Staff Roles.

Lesson 3: ICS Functional Areas and Command Staff Roles

SM-110

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-111

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 1:

Lesson 4 Overview

In the previous unit, you learned that the Command Staff supports the Incident
Commander who is responsible for overall management of the incident.
This unit introduces you to the General Staff.
By the end of this unit, you should be able to:
•
•

Identify the Incident Command System (ICS) titles used for General Staff members.
Describe the major activities of the four general staff sections.

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-112

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 2:

General Staff

To maintain span of control, the Incident Commander may establish any or all of the
following four sections: Operations, Planning, Logistics, and Finance/Administration.

Note

The person in charge of each section is designated as a Section
Chief. Section Chiefs have the ability to expand their sections to meet
the needs of the situation. As shown here, they report directly to the
Incident Commander. Let’s take a closer look at these General Staff
positions.

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-113

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 3:

General Staff Overview

In an expanding incident, the Incident Commander first establishes the Operations
Section. The remaining sections are established as needed to support the
operation.

Note

The General Staff overall responsibilities are summarized in the
graphic. In an expanding incident, the Incident Command first
establishes the Operations Section. The remaining Sections are
established as needed to support the operation.

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-114

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 4:

General Staff Overview Video

General Staff Overview Video
The following video will provide an overview of the General Staff
Sections.
Video

Video Duration: 2 minutes, 54 seconds

General Staff Overview
Video Transcript
As you previously learned, an Incident Commander is responsible for all incident
management functions including: operations, planning, logistics, and finance and
administration.
Depending on the incident needs, the Incident Commander may delegate some or all of
these functions by establishing Sections. If a Section Chief is assigned to an incident,
he or she will report directly to the Incident Commander.
Together, these Section Chiefs are referred to as the General Staff. Let’s take a look at
the responsibilities of each Section Chief.
The Operations Section Chief is responsible for developing and implementing strategy
and tactics to accomplish the incident objectives. This means that the Operations
Section Chief organizes, assigns, and supervises all the tactical or response resources
assigned to the incident. Additionally, if a Staging Area is established, the Operations
Section Chief would manage it.
The Planning Section Chief oversees the collection, evaluation, and dissemination of
operational information related to the incident. It is the Planning Section’s responsibility
to prepare and disseminate the Incident Action Plan, as well as track the status of all
incident resources.
The Planning Section helps ensure responders have accurate information and provides
resources such as maps and floor plans.
The Logistics Section is responsible for providing facilities, services, and material
support for the incident.
Logistics is critical on more complex incidents. The Logistics Section Chief assists the
Incident Commander and Operations Section Chief by providing the resources and
services required to support incident activities. During an incident, Logistics is
responsible for ensuring the well-being of responders by providing sufficient food, water,

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-115

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

and medical services. Logistics is also responsible for arranging communication
equipment, computers, transportation, and anything else needed to support the incident.
Another critical function during complex incidents is Finance and Administration. The
Finance and Administration Section Chief is responsible for all of the financial and cost
analysis aspects of an incident. These include contract negotiation, recording personnel
and equipment time, documenting and processing claims for accidents and injuries
occurring at the incident, and keeping a running tally of the costs associated with the
incident.
We’ve now introduced you to the four ICS Sections.
It is important to remember that the ICS organizational structure is determined based
on the incident objectives and resource requirements. It expands and contracts in a
flexible manner. And, only those functions, positions, or sections necessary for a
particular incident are filled.

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-116

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 5:

Operations Section

The Incident Commander determines whether
there is a need for an Operations Section and,
if so, will designate an Operations Section
Chief.
It is up to the Operations Section Chief to
activate any additional staffing that is needed.
When the Operations Section Chief is
designated, the staging and management of
operational resources moves from the Incident
Command to Operations.
If no Operations Section is established, the
Incident Commander will perform all operations
functions.

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-117

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 6:

Operations Section Major Activities

The major activities of the Operations Section may include:
•
•
•
•

Implementing strategies and developing tactics to carry out the incident
objectives
Directing the management of all tactical activities on behalf of the Incident
Commander
Supporting the development of the Incident Action Plan to ensure it accurately
reflects current operations
Organizing, assigning, and supervising the tactical response resources

The Operations Section is responsible for directing and coordinating
all incident tactical operations.
The Operations Section:
Note

•
•
•
•

Is typically one of the first organizations to be assigned to the
incident.
Develops from the bottom up.
Has the most incident resources.
May have Staging Areas and special organizations.

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-118

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 7:

Planning Section

The Planning Section Chief is designated only
after the Incident Commander determines whether
there is a need for a Planning Section.
It is up to the Planning Section Chief to activate
any additional staffing that is needed.
The Incident Commander will perform all planning
functions if no Planning Section is established.

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-119

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 8:

Planning Section: Major Activities

The major activities of the Planning Section may include:
•
•
•
•
•

Preparing and documenting Incident Action Plans
Managing information and maintaining situational awareness for the incident
Tracking resources assigned to the incident
Maintaining incident documentation
Developing plans for demobilization

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-120

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 9:

Logistics Section

The Logistics Section Chief is designated only
after the Incident Commander determines whether
there is a need for a Logistics Section.
It is up to the Logistics Section Chief to activate
any additional staffing that is needed.
The Incident Commander will perform all logistics
functions if no Logistics Section is established.

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-121

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 10: Logistics Section: Major Activities
The Logistics Section is responsible for all services and support needs, including:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Ordering, obtaining, maintaining, and accounting for essential personnel,
equipment, and supplies
Providing communication planning and resources
Setting up food services for responders
Setting up and maintaining incident facilities
Providing support transportation
Providing medical services to incident personnel

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-122

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 11: Finance/Administration Section
The Incident Commander determines whether
there is a need for a Finance/Administration
Section at the incident.
If so, the Incident Commander will designate an
individual to fill the position of the
Finance/Administration Section Chief.
The Time, Compensation/Claims, Cost, and
Procurement Units may be established within this
section.

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-123

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 12: Finance/Administration Section:
Major Activities
The Finance/Administration Section is set up for any incident that requires incidentspecific financial management. The Finance/Administration Section is responsible
for:
•
•
•
•
•

Contract negotiation and monitoring
Timekeeping
Cost analysis
Compensation for injury or damage to property
Documentation for reimbursement (e.g., under mutual aid agreements and
assistance agreements)

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-124

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 13: Section Chiefs Activity 4.1
Section Chiefs Activity 4.1
Activity Purpose: To review the General Staff Section responsibilities.
Instructions: Working individually:
Activity

1. Review the table in your Student Manual.
2. Identify the correct Section Chief for each statement.
3. Be prepared to share your answers in 5 minutes.
Time: 10 minutes

Statement
1.

In advance of severe
flooding, there is a need to
get generators and
communications
equipment to the Staging
Areas to equip advance
response teams. My
Section is responsible for
making sure the needed
equipment arrives at the
Staging Areas.

2.

As the response is
underway, my Section
tracks all personnel
participating in the
response.

3.

My Section conducts
response activities such as
search and rescue, and
first aid services being
provided to disaster
survivors.

4.

I support the incident
response activities by
overseeing contracting for
needed supplies and

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

Which Section Chief?

SM-125

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Statement

Which Section Chief?

services that are not
already available.

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-126

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 14: General Staff Review (1 of 5)

Which member of the General Staff is described below?
"In advance of severe flooding, there is a need to get generators and
communications equipment to the Staging Areas to equip advance response teams.
It’s my responsibility to make sure the needed equipment arrives at the Staging
Areas."

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-127

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 15: General Staff Review (2 of 5)

Which member of the General Staff is described below?
"As the response is underway, my section tracks all personnel participating in the
response."

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-128

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 16: General Staff Review (3 of 5)

Which member of the General Staff is described below?
"My section conducts response activities such as search and rescue, and
coordinates medical services being provided to disaster survivors."

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-129

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 17: General Staff Review (4 of 5)

Which member of the General Staff is described below?
"I support the incident response activities by overseeing contracting for needed
supplies and services that are not already available."

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-130

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 18: General Staff Review (5 of 5)

Which member of the General Staff is described below?
"Throughout the incident and during the after-action review process, the reports that
we develop will be very useful."

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-131

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 19: General Staff Functions - Activity 4.2
Activity Purpose: To reinforce participants’ understanding of General Staff functions.
Instructions:
1. Working in groups, review the scenario presented in your Student Manual.
2. Use what you have learned to answer the questions for each part of the activity
before proceeding to the next page. Write your answers on chart paper.
3. When you have answered each set of questions, move on to the next page.
4. Select a spokesperson and be prepared to discuss your answers to all the questions
in 15 minutes.
Time: 20 minutes
Scenario Part 1: A store employee at a small shopping mall discovers a package
leaking a noxious smelling chemical in a storage room. No one is sure how long the box
has been there, or how long it has been leaking. Employees and customers are
beginning to complain about feeling lightheaded and nauseous. The business owner
calls 911. In the meantime, the mall security manager arrives to see why people are
rushing out of the store. The security manager establishes the initial ICS organization.
General Staff Functions - Activity 4.2 Part 1
Activity Purpose: To reinforce participants’ understanding of General
Staff functions.
Instructions:

Activity

1. Working in groups, review the scenario presented in your Student
Manual.
2. Use what you’ve learned to answer the questions for each part of
the activity before proceeding to the next page. Write your
answers on chart paper.
3. When you’ve answered each set of questions, move on to the next
page.
4. Select a spokesperson and be prepared to discuss your answers
to all the questions in 15 minutes.
Time: 20 minutes
Scenario Part 1: A store employee at a small shopping mall discovers
a package leaking a noxious smelling chemical in a storage room. No
one is sure how long the box has been there, or how long it has been
leaking. Employees and customers are beginning to complain about
feeling lightheaded and nauseous. The business owner calls 911. In
the meantime, the mall security manager arrives to see why people
are rushing out of the store. The security manager establishes the
initial ICS organization.
Question:

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-132

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

•

In the ICS organization described above, the mall security
manager has assumed which role?

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-133

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 20: General Staff Functions - Activity 4.2
Part 2
Scenario Part 2: A Battalion Chief and hazmat team arrive at the scene. In addition, a
law enforcement patrol car with one officer has arrived to help with perimeter control.

General Staff Functions - Activity 4.2 Part 2
Scenario Part 2: A Battalion Chief and hazmat team arrive at the
scene. In addition, a law enforcement patrol car with one officer has
arrived to help with perimeter control.
Question:
•

What must happen before the HazMat Battalion Chief assumes
the Incident Commander role?

Activity

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-134

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 21: General Staff Functions - Activity 4.2
Part 3
Scenario Part 3: To maintain span of control as the incident expands, the Incident
Commander establishes an Operations Section.

General Staff Functions - Activity 4.2 Part 3
Scenario Part 3: To maintain span of control as the incident expands,
the Incident Commander establishes an Operations Section.
Questions:

Activity

•

What is the role of the Operations Section?

•

What is the ICS title of the person in charge of the Operations
Section?

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-135

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 22: General Staff Functions - Activity 4.2
Part 4
Scenario Part 4: After the first hour, the Incident Commander establishes a second
Section that will develop the Incident Action Plan and track the status of resources on
the scene.
General Staff Functions - Activity 4.2 Part 4
Scenario Part 4: After the first hour, the Incident Commander
establishes a second Section that will develop the Incident Action
Plan and track the status of resources on the scene.
Question:
•

What is the correct title of this Section?

Activity

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-136

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 23: General Staff Functions - Activity 4.2
Part 5
Scenario Part 5: In an interview, the business owner mentions that she has received
threats from a recently terminated employee. The substance has yet to be identified.
Given these circumstances, there is a need to find witnesses and locate people who
may have come in contact with the package. Interview areas have been set up in the
mall parking lot. There are an increasing number of response personnel at the scene,
creating the need for communications support along with food and drinks.

General Staff Functions - Activity 4.2 Part 5
Scenario Part 5: In an interview, the business owner mentions that
she has received threats from a recently terminated employee. The
substance has yet to be identified. Given these circumstances, there
is a need to find witnesses and locate people who may have come in
contact with the package. Interview areas have been set up in the
mall parking lot. There are an increasing number of response
personnel at the scene, creating the need for communications support
along with food and drinks.
Question:
Activity

•

Which Section is responsible for providing these support
resources?

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-137

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 24: General Staff Functions - Activity 4.2
Part 6
Scenario Part 6: Cleanup is complete, and the few exposed customers and staff have
been located and are undergoing treatment. The operation is now shifting to an ongoing
investigation of the disgruntled former employee.
General Staff Functions - Activity 4.2 Part 6
Scenario Part 6: Cleanup is complete, and the few exposed
customers and staff have been located and are undergoing treatment.
The operation is now shifting to an ongoing investigation of the
disgruntled former employee.
Question:
•

Which resources would you demobilize?

Activity

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-138

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 25: Unit 4 Summary
This unit introduced you to:
•
•

The Incident Command System (ICS) roles of the General Staff.
The major activities of the four ICS General Staff sections.

The next unit focuses on how the ICS applies to you and your agency or organization.

Lesson 4: General Staff Roles

SM-139

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-140

November 2018

Visual 1:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Unit 5 Overview

In this unit, you will be given an opportunity to apply information presented in the
previous units.
You will be given a scenario involving flooding and you will be asked to select which
NIMS Management Characteristics are demonstrated throughout the scenario.
By the end of this unit, you should be able to:
•
•

Identify how the National Incident Management System (NIMS)
Management Characteristics apply in specific roles.
Identify how the National Incident Management System (NIMS) Management
Characteristics apply in specific situations.

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-141

November 2018

Visual 2:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Emerald City Flood Scenario

Activity Purpose: To reinforce participants' understanding of NIMS Management
Characteristics.
Instructions:
1. Working in groups, review the scenario presented in your Student Manual.
2. Use what you have learned in the course to answer the questions. Write your
answers on chart paper.
3. Select a spokesperson and be prepared to discuss your answers to the questions.
Time: 10 minutes
Scenario: It has been raining heavily for the past seven days in Emerald City. The
Emerald City and Liberty County Emergency Management offices are preparing for a
response to a possible flood situation. Residents are starting to ask questions about the
rising river and lake levels, and are wondering if they will need to leave their homes.

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-142

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Management Characteristics-Knowledge
Check/Scenario Questions
NIMS Management Characteristics

Note

A NIMS Management Characteristics Summary is provided at the end
of Unit 2 (Instructor Guide and Student Manual) for assistance in
completing the knowledge checks.

Activity 5.1
1. You are an American Red Cross Disaster Program Specialist in
charge of teams trained to help in sheltering displaced persons. You
have been notified by your office to be prepared to deploy to conduct
shelter operations. Your supervisor has asked you to come to the
office to begin organizing volunteers and get prepared to set up
shelters, if tasked.
What NIMS Management Characteristic are you supporting?

Activity
2. You are a Geographic Information System (GIS) specialist who
normally works at the Public Works Planning office. You are directed
to report to the Emergency Operations Center (EOC) and have been
assigned to the Planning Section Chief. You will be producing maps to
display potential flooding impacts in the city and county.
What NIMS Management Characteristics are you supporting?
Discuss all that may apply.

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-143

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 3:

Emerald City Flood Scenario: Update

1
Instructions:
1. Working in groups, review the scenario presented in your Student Manual.
2. Use what you have learned in the course to answer the questions. Write your
answers on chart paper.
3. Select a spokesperson and be prepared to discuss your answers to the questions.
Time: 10 minutes
Scenario Update 1:
Raining has continued for three more days and the flooding is expected to reach its
highest point today. The flooding has caused residents to evacuate their homes in
anticipation of rising floodwaters. Basement flooding to the first-floor level is anticipated.
The local Nursing Home is assessing the situation to determine if an evacuation of
residents is necessary.

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-144

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 4:

Emerald City Flood Scenario: Update

1 (Continued)
The Liaison Officer, with the support
of the Public Information Officer, is
in contact with business owners to
determine if any of their stored
chemicals will be affected by the
flooding, causing possible
contamination downstream.
Based upon previous floods, it is a
high priority to establish shelters for
evacuees early on. The Emergency
Operation Plan pre-identified the
following shelters: Lawrence College
Auditorium and Lafayette Middle
School.
Due to the complexity of the
incident, the Incident Commander
has expanded the Operations
Section to include an Evacuation
Group. The Evacuation Group
Supervisor immediately contacts the
Lawrence College President and the
Lafayette Middle School Principal to
begin the process of establishing
shelters in those facilities.

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-145

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Management Characteristic-Knowledge
Check/Scenario Questions Update 1
Activity 5.1: Scenario Update 1 Questions
1. You are the American Red Cross liaison in the Emergency
Operation Center and you print up a list of the location of materials
necessary to outfit the shelters. Materials stored in both facilities are
adequate to meet the initial needs. Both the College and the Middle
School are implementing their respective plans and are establishing
necessary staffing to support the shelter requirements.
What NIMS Management Characteristic is being demonstrated?

2. Due to the complexity of the incident, the Incident Commander has
expanded the Operations Section to include an Evacuation Group.
Activity

What NIMS Management Characteristic is being demonstrated?

3. You are the City Fire Chief and are evaluating the supervisory
structure needed to manage the Incident Command Post staff. You
also request senior representatives from the Health Care community
and from Public Works to help develop objectives to protect the
residents of the nursing home and the critical water resources of the
community.
What NIMS Management Characteristics are you supporting?
Discuss all that apply.

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-146

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 5:

Emerald City Flood Scenario: Update

2
Instructions:
1. Working in groups, review the
scenario presented in your Student
Manual.
2. Use what you have learned in the
course to answer the questions.
Write your answers on chart paper.
3. Select a spokesperson and be
prepared to discuss your answers to
the questions.
Time: 10 minutes
Scenario Update 2:
The Evacuation Group is reporting that
homeowners are beginning to move
their families out of the area. The
American Red Cross has opened two
shelters, one at the Lawrence College
Auditorium and one at the Lafayette
Middle School.

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-147

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 6:

Emerald City Flood Scenario: Update

2 (Continued)
The Nursing Home is attempting to move 55 patients from their skilled nursing care
facility and is asking for assistance from Emergency Medical Services, the Fire
Department, and the School Bus Company.
Acme Chemical is reporting first-floor flooding of their chemical processing plant. They
are not reporting any chemical release but are closely monitoring their facility.
Calls are coming into the Emergency Operations Center from concerned citizens
wondering about the safety of the municipal drinking water. Additional concerns about
the wellbeing of water fowl and fish in the river and lake are being voiced because
tourism, fishing, and hunting are a major part of the economy in the area.
Additional resources are needed for evacuation, sheltering, sandbagging, water level
and chemical monitoring, traffic control, and scene security at other Incident Command
Posts. Several media helicopters have arrived in the area to film the ongoing
operations.

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-148

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Management Characteristics-Knowledge
Check/Scenario Questions Update 2
Activity 5.1 Scenario Update 2 Questions
Instructions:
1. Working in groups, review the scenario presented in your Student
Manual.
2. Use what you’ve learned in the course to answer the questions.
Write your answers on chart paper.
3. Select a spokesperson and be prepared to discuss your answers
to the questions.
Time: 10 minutes
1. General Staff immediately come together and begin developing
strategies. General Staff Chiefs are:
•
•
•

Evaluating the supervisory structure needed to manage the
Incident Command Post staff
Identifying resource shortfalls
Updating planning documents.

What NIMS Management Characteristics are you
supporting? Discuss all that apply.
Activity
2. You are the Operations Section Chief at the Incident Command
Post and request that all response communications be conducted
using a pre-determined set of frequencies. You also remind everyone
in the field to use plain language.
What NIMS Management Characteristics are being
demonstrated? Discuss all that apply.

3. The Operations Section has determined that the Emergency
Medical Services, the Fire Department, and the School Bus Company
will be assigned to the evacuation of the Nursing Home. They will all
converge at City Hall and will be dispatched, as appropriate, to begin

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-149

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

the rapid and safe movement of the residents to their temporary
shelter locations.
What NIMS Management Characteristic is being demonstrated?

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-150

November 2018

Visual 7:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Emerald City Flood Scenario: Update

3
The nursing home’s emergency plan calls for relocating residents with acute
medical care needs to the Community Hospital. Residents without acute medical
needs will be sheltered.
The American Red Cross, in collaboration with the Salvation Army, are managing
the shelters and providing food for displaced residents.
The Public Works Department and the Health Department are monitoring the water
intake at the Water Treatment Plant for signs of chemical contamination. Public
Works crews are placing sandbags to protect the Water Treatment Plant.

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-151

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Management Characteristics-Knowledge
Check/Scenario Questions Update 3
Activity 5.1 Scenario Update 3 Questions
Instructions:
1. Working in groups, review the scenario presented in your Student
Manual.
2. Use what you’ve learned in the course to answer the questions.
Write your answers on chart paper.
3. Select a spokesperson and be prepared to discuss your answers
to the questions.
Time: 10 minutes
1. You are the President of Lawrence College. You and the American
Red Cross Shelter Manager have contacted the Incident Command
Post concerning the ability to meet the nutritional and long term
pharmaceutical needs of the elderly residents. The Liaison Officer
requests assistance from the Emergency Operations Center.
What NIMS Management Characteristic is being demonstrated?
Activity

2. You are the Middle School Principal. You and the Shelter Manager
notify the Incident Command Post that several people are complaining
of severe stomach cramps, diarrhea, and vomiting. You ask for
assistance from medical and public health personnel. You also
request additional sanitation supplies, bedding, and bathing materials.
The Operations Section Chief is requesting additional assistance from
the Emergency Operations Center for a specialized monitoring team
to be deployed to the shelter to survey for a possible outbreak. Survey
results will be shared with Health and Public Works departments.
What NIMS Management Characteristic are you supporting?
Discuss all that apply.

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-152

November 2018

Visual 8:

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Emerald City Flood Scenario: Update

4
The river levels have steadily receded and residential property owners are anxious and
attempting to return to their properties. Public Utility Crews are assisting City Building
Inspection crews in the inspection of evacuated homes for safety and structural integrity
before allowing residents to move back in. Drinking water qualities are being monitored
and cleanup and damage assessment activities are beginning.
The American Red Cross and Salvation Army report that most evacuees have found
longer-term temporary housing. Very few evacuees remain in their shelters, and
shelters are anticipated to be closing soon.
Emerald City Health Department personnel, along with representatives from the County
and the State Health Departments, are monitoring the water intakes and the city
drinking water for any signs of contamination. Nothing significant has been detected so
far. The County Health Department is also monitoring private wells as requested by the
landowners.

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-153

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Visual 9:

Emerald City Flood Scenario: Update

4 (Continued)
The Nursing Home reports that water has receded from their building and that they are
beginning cleanup procedures. They expect to finish their cleanup, including mandatory
inspections by the State Health Department, within a week.
Because the activities are shifting from response to recovery, the mayor of Emerald City
has asked the Incident Commander to prepare to demobilize and transfer command of
the incident to a Unified Command consisting of Emergency Management, the Emerald
City Health Department, and the Emerald City Department of Public Works.
The newly formed Unified Command will focus on restoring essential services, providing
a safe re-entry for displaced residents, and completing a thorough damage assessment.
The transfer of command will take place at the end of the next operational period.

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-154

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

November 2018

Management Characteristics-Knowledge
Check/Scenario Questions Update 4
Activity 5.1 Scenario Update 4 Questions
Instructions:
1. Working in groups, review the scenario presented in your Student
Manual.
2. Use what you’ve learned in the course to answer the questions.
Write your answers on chart paper.
3. Select a spokesperson and be prepared to discuss your answers
to the questions.
Time: 10 minutes
1. As phasedown of shelter operations has begun, the American Red
Cross Disaster Operations Supervisor has directed you to begin reassigning shelter staff personnel and releasing those that are no
longer required. You direct released staff to checkout.
What NIMS Management Characteristic are you
supporting? Discuss all that apply.
Activity

2. You are the Middle School Principal. As shelter operations are
beginning to phase down, you continue to be concerned about the
illness suffered by the residents of your facility, which was confirmed
to be a food borne illness from donated food. Since school will resume
soon, you want to reassure school staff and parents that there are no
residual risks. You request the newly formed Unified Command for a
public information broadcast and a representative from the Health
Department to share information regarding the illness and be
available to answer questions.
What NIMS Management Characteristic is being demonstrated?

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-155

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 10: Unit 5 Summary
You have now completed Unit 5.
In this unit you have:
•
•

Identified how the National Incident Management System (NIMS) Management
Characteristics apply in specific roles
Identified how the National Incident Management System (NIMS) Management
Characteristics apply in specific situations

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-156

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 11: Course Summary
You have now completed this course.
You should now be able to:
•
•
•
•
•

Explain the principles and basic structure of the Incident Command System (ICS).
Describe the NIMS Management Characteristics that are the foundation of ICS.
Describe the ICS functional areas and the roles of the Incident Commander and
Command Staff.
Describe the General Staff roles within ICS.
Identify how NIMS management characteristics apply to ICS for a variety of roles
and discipline areas.

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-157

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 12: IS-100.c Final Exam Instructions
When the review is completed, follow these Final Exam instructions:
1. Take a few moments to review your Student Manual and identify any questions.
2. Make sure that you get all of your questions answered prior to beginning the final
test.
3. When taking the test online …
•
•
•
•

Go to http://training.fema.gov/IS/crslist.asp and click on the link for IS-0100.c.
Click on "Take Final Exam."
Read each item carefully.
Check your work before submitting your answers.

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-158

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 13: Certificate of Completion
To receive a certificate of completion, you must take the multiple-choice Final Exam
and score at least 75 percent on the test.
Upon successful completion of the Final Exam, you will receive an e-mail message with
a link to your electronic certification.

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-159

November 2018

IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, ICS 100

Visual 14: Course Evaluation
Completing the course evaluation form is important. Your comments will be used to
evaluate the effectiveness of this course and make changes for future versions.
Please use the course evaluation forms provided by the organization sponsoring the
course.

Lesson 5: How ICS Applies to You

SM-160

